[Illustration: APRIL, 1883.

VOL. XXXVII.

NO. 4.

The American Missionary]




CONTENTS


                                                         PAGE.


  EDITORIAL.

    THIS NUMBER—FINANCIAL                                   97
    PARAGRAPHS                                              98
    DEATH OF MRS. G. S. POPE—PARAGRAPHS                     99
    COLOR PREJUDICE—BENEFACTIONS                           100
    GENERAL NOTES—AFRICA—THE CHINESE                       101


  THE INDIANS.

    WORK TRANSFERRED BY THE AM. BOARD                      102
    SUGGESTIONS OF ENLARGEMENT                             103
    SANTEE NORMAL TRAINING SCHOOL (cut)                    104
    ASPECTS OF THE INDIAN PROBLEM, BY HON. CARL SCHURZ     105
    WORK AT CARLISLE, BY CAPT. R. H. PRATT                 108
    MANDAN HUT, DAKOTA (cut)                               111
    HISTORY AND OUTLOOK OF THE INDIAN WORK TRANSFERRED
      TO THE A. M. A., PROF. ALFRED L. RIGGS               111
    SISSETON GIRLS, WITH TEACHER (cut)                     114
    INDIAN INDUSTRIES AT HAMPTON, GEN. S. C. ARMSTRONG     115
    REVIVAL WORK AMONG INDIANS AT HAMPTON, MISS ISABEL
      B. EUSTIS                                            117


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    INDIAN HUT (cut)                                       118
    THE LITTLE INDIAN OF CLEAR LAKE                        118


  RECEIPTS                                                 120


  AIM AND WORK—STATISTICS—WANTS                            123

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK.
         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,
                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.
          Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y.,
                      as second-class matter.




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


PRESIDENT.

  HON. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


TREASURER.

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


AUDITORS.

  M. F. READING.
  WM. A. NASH.


EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman; A. P. FOSTER, Secretary; LYMAN
ABBOTT, ALONZO S. BALL, A. S. BARNES, C. T. CHRISTENSEN, FRANKLIN
FAIRBANKS, CLINTON B. FISK, S. B. HALLIDAY, SAMUEL HOLMES, CHARLES
A. HULL, _Samuel S. Marples_, CHARLES L. MEAD, WM. H. WARD, A. L.
WILLISTON.


DISTRICT SECRETARIES

  Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
  Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
  Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields,
to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *


“I THINK I’D LIKE TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS WHEN I’M SIXTY.”

The gentleman who made the above remark carries a $10,000 endowment
policy in the STATE MUTUAL LIFE ASSURANCE COMPANY, of Worcester,
Mass. That sum will be paid to _him_ at “sixty,” or to his family
if he dies before reaching that age.

Thousands of men now living will _need_ $10,000 when they become
“sixty”—and their families will need it should they die before
attaining that age. Both of these objects can be secured by the
payment of a small sum each year to

THE STATE MUTUAL LIFE ASSURANCE CO., OF WORCESTER, MASS.,

Which is one of the OLDEST, STRONGEST and BEST companies in the
United States.

This Company guarantees a CASH-SURRENDER value of every policy it
issues after the second annual payment.


EXAMPLE.

1. An ordinary life policy, issued at the age of 30 for $10,000,
annual premium $226.30. (The second and all subsequent premiums
will be reduced by dividends.) After ten annual premiums have been
paid, the guaranteed cash-surrender value is $909.80; the paid-up
value $2,387.70, or more than gross premiums paid. The _net_ cost
for the past ten years of all similar policies has been $1,692.77,
which reduced the cost of the insurance to $7.83 per $1,000 for
each year.

This Company never disputes, or resists, an honest claim. It has
been a party to only four suits in thirty-eight years—and in _no
case_ have the courts held a claim, resisted by the company, _to be
valid_.

For full explanations, please call on or address

                  C. W. ANDERSON, General Agent,
                                            145 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

            Vol. XXXVII.      APRIL, 1883.      No. 4.

                 *       *       *       *       *


AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

We devote the greater part of this number of the MISSIONARY to the
Indian problem. Communications will be found from Capt. Pratt,
Gen. Armstrong, Hon. Carl Schurz and Prof. Riggs. These gentlemen
have made the condition of the Indian a study for some years, and,
by experience in public service, in the army, and by educational
and religious endeavors, have had rare opportunities to test
their theories and principles by practical efforts in behalf of
the Indians. We know of no men more competent to speak on the
subject or more worthy of the confidence of the public. Statistics
relating to our Indian work, including that recently transferred
to us by the American Board, are given. As we now are charged with
the entire work done by the Congregationalists for the American
aborigines, we trust we shall have the prayers and help needful for
doing it efficiently.

       *       *       *       *       *


FINANCIAL.

Our _receipts_ show a falling off. Five months of the fiscal year
are ended, and the receipts from donations are $20,774.39 less
than for the corresponding months of last year; from legacies
only $17,471.44 more. The decrease is in the contributions of
living donors, and upon these rather than upon legacies, which
are fluctuating and uncertain, must the Association rely for its
regular support. Its _work_ was never more successful or needed.
The kind of schools and churches it establishes, and the preachers
and teachers it sends forth, are becoming more fully appreciated.
We are urgently invited to enter new and unusually promising
openings for an enlarged church work. The valuable service rendered
by our increased corps of lady missionaries makes a strong demand
for large additions to their number. The Indian work received by
the Association from the American Board will add about $20,000
to the expenditures of the year, without the enlargement which
it so greatly needs. The Chinese work makes a strong appeal for
additional accommodations for the increasing number of pupils in
the schools.

Without an increase of receipts, or the creation of a debt,
the Association cannot enlarge its work, or even sustain it in
its present condition. Our Executive Committee feel themselves
pledged against a debt by their promises to the public and by
their own deep convictions of duty. But they confidently believe
that the conscientious donors who have stood by the Association
so faithfully in the past will promptly render such efficient
assistance as will not only save it from debt or curtailment, but
will authorize enlargement.

       *       *       *       *       *


MUST HAVES.

The following “must haves” sent us in a private letter from
President Ware, of Atlanta, illustrate the urgency of the appeals
that constantly come to us from our different workers South.
Mr. Ware says: “We must have buildings; we must have endowments
for running expenses; we must or go to the wall; we must have
building for grade B; for model school building, $8,000; we must
have cottage in girls’ lot for housekeeping instruction, $5,000;
we must have new hall for girls, $25,000, that will give room for
100 girls; we must have shop for industries, carpenter, etc., and
endowment for support of man in that department, about $50,000 for
both;” a batch, it will be seen, of $88,000, with no estimate of
the amount needed for general endowment. We believe that it has
been found so far by those who have put their money into Atlanta
University that it has yielded “some thirty, some sixty, and some
an hundred fold.” The stock is not all taken. We invite investors
to examine the “points” in this venture, and trust that the merits
of the security will warrant a speedy absorption of the entire
amount called for.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are cheered by many kind words relating to the AMERICAN
MISSIONARY, and believe that those interested in the nation’s
welfare, and especially in the redemption of the South, find in
it much to encourage them to hope and to give in behalf of the
people for whom we labor. Nothing, however, gives more evidence
of appreciation than the steady response to our appeals for paid
subscriptions. So far this year these have been very gratifying.
The price is fifty cents, and we hope there will be no abatement
of interest on the part of our friends in helping us place the
magazine on a paying basis.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the list of the teachers at Hampton, as reported in the February
_Missionary_, the name of Miss Waldron should have been put as Miss
M. M. Waldron, M.D., School Physician.

       *       *       *       *       *


DEATH OF MRS. G. S. POPE.

After an illness of ten days, terminating in malarial pneumonia,
Mrs. Pope died Feb. 2, at Tougaloo University, Tougaloo, Miss. For
the past fifteen years she had been engaged in missionary work
under the A. M. A., laboring in Montgomery, Louisville, Selma,
Talladega and Tougaloo. Mrs. Pope brought into her work rare
qualities of mind and heart. Her good judgment, her readiness in
emergencies and her kindly interest in every one was an inspiration
to all. Her death will be sorely felt, not only by her husband and
two little boys, but by the large corps of workers, and the pupils
with whom she has been associated for so many years.

       *       *       *       *       *


The conventions held in Connecticut by the Congregational
benevolent societies during February were well attended. One
hundred and eleven churches were invited and eighty-eight
represented. The meetings for April will be held in the following
order: Tuesday, the 3d, Thomaston, morning and afternoon;
Wednesday, the 4th, Waterbury, 2d church, morning and afternoon;
Thursday, the 5th, New Britain, afternoon and evening; Tuesday,
the 10th, New Haven, Davenport Church, afternoon and evening;
Wednesday, the 11th, Rockville, 1st church, morning and afternoon;
Thursday, the 12th, Putnam, morning and afternoon; Tuesday,
the 17th, Norfolk, morning and afternoon; Wednesday, the 18th,
Torrington, 3d church, morning and afternoon; Thursday, the
19th, West Winsted, morning and afternoon; Tuesday, the 24th,
Danielsonville, morning and afternoon; Wednesday, the 25th,
Norwich, 2d church, morning and afternoon; Thursday, the 26th, New
London, 1st church, morning and afternoon; Friday, the 27th, New
Haven, Fair Haven, 1st church, morning and afternoon.

       *       *       *       *       *

“SERMONS AND SPEECHES,” by Rev. Atticus G. Haygood, D.D., is the
title of a neat volume issued by the Southern Methodist Publishing
House, Nashville. It contains 428 pages, and is offered at the low
price of $1.25. The sermon likely to attract the most attention is
on “The New South, Gratitude, Amendment, Hope.” It was preached
on Thanksgiving Day, 1880, and circulated extensively in pamphlet
form. “A Christian Citizen,” another sermon, is perhaps of equal
merit, and especially pertinent to the condition of affairs South.
The addresses of special interest to the general reader relate
to “The Negro—A Citizen” and “The New South from a Southern
Standpoint.” These addresses are comprehensive, catholic and kindly
in spirit. Dr. Haygood convinces his readers of his sincerity, and
charms them by the vigor and freshness of his style. Every word he
utters indicates his purpose to do good. The circulation of these
sermons and speeches will do much to create better feeling between
well-disposed people North and South. We wish the book the success
it merits.

       *       *       *       *       *


Pursuant to the action taken at our last Annual Meeting relating
to a petition requesting a report on the policy of the Association
in regard to race or color prejudice in the support of schools or
churches, our Executive Committee, to whom the matter was referred,
have passed the following minutes.

I. That in accordance with the New Testament doctrine upon which
the Association was founded, and by which it has from the beginning
been governed, that God has made of one blood all the nations of
men, we reiterate the rule, which we believe that fidelity to
Christ requires, that all our churches and schools shall open their
doors impartially to persons of every class, race and color.

II. That in obedience to the same New Testament doctrine, we shall
require that all churches aided by us shall unite with neighboring
churches of the same faith and order in Christian fellowship in
the same conferences or associations, and in other usual means of
fraternity and fellowship, making no distinctions on account of
race or color.

III. That this Association will not enter upon any new church work
in any city or town where the American Home Missionary Society has
already established a church work, without previous conference with
the officers of its sister Society.

Minutes similar in purport to the above have been passed by the
Home Missionary Society.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

Mr. William Backnell, of Philadelphia, has given $60,000 to the
University of Lewisburg, Pa., for endowment purposes.

Westminster College is to receive $2,000 from the estate of Miss
Jane A. Thompson, of Missouri.

The late Mr. Samuel Willets gave $100,000 to Swarthmore College, a
Quaker institution, near Philadelphia.

Dartmouth College is to receive $50,000 from the estate of the late
George T. Wilson, of Providence, R.I.

It is reported that Wm. H. Vanderbilt has recently given $100,000
to Vanderbilt University, at Nashville, Tenn.

Mrs. Mary Young has given $500,000 to Fall River, Mass., for the
establishment of a school of high rank. The gift is made in memory
of an only son.

Washburn College received a Christmas gift of $1,000 from Mrs.
Emily G. Williston, of East Hampton, Mass., and a New Year’s
offering of $1,000 from Hon. Wm. Hyde, of Ware, Mass.

By the will of the late Wm. E. Dodge, of New York, the Syrian
Protestant College is to receive $20,000; Lincoln University,
$10,000; Howard University, Atlanta University and Hampton
Institute, $5,000 each.

Miss Baxter has given $50,000 to provide a laboratory for a college
at Dundee, Scotland, which was founded by herself and her cousin,
Dr. Baxter, some years ago, at an expense of $750,000.

Mrs. Adeline Smith, of Oak Park, Ill., recently gave $11,000 for
the founding of a Philander Smith chair in the University of Little
Rock, Ark., to be a perpetual memorial of her husband, who died
about a year ago.

_Permanent endowments are needed in order that the institutions of
the American Missionary Association may achieve that larger success
which is rightly expected of them. Every consideration of the past,
of the present and of the future, enforces the demand that these
endowments should be provided at once._

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


AFRICA.

—The German Reichstag has voted an appropriation of one million
marks to defray the expenses of an expedition now being fitted out
for the exploration of Central Africa.

—The Church Missionary Society have received tidings from their
Uganda Mission at Mtesa’s capital that five young men have been
baptized, the first fruits of the mission.

—Notwithstanding the presence of General Matthews with the troops
of the Sultan of Zanzibar, a brisk trade in slaves is going on at
Mombassa. General Matthews is now fighting with a rebel chieftain
who has a settlement not far from Mombassa where he receives
runaway slaves.

—The Church Missionary Society of England is about to begin
missionary operations in Egypt. It is to be under the care of Rev.
F. A. Klein, an able Arabic scholar. The same society had a station
at Cairo in the beginning of this century, but abandoned it in 1824.

—The English Baptists have established a station at Stanley Pool.
The new missionary ship “Peace” is now ready to be shipped to the
Congo. Mr. Stanley is about to publish an account of the results of
his explorations. The French government has recently appropriated
about $300,000 to defray the expenses of De Brassa’s expedition.

—The famous work of Miss Whately, daughter of Archbishop Whately,
who for years carried on her work at Cairo, at her own charges,
is a very interesting branch of Egyptian missions. The Khedive
presented Miss Whately with land for her buildings, and her Cairo
schools number 300 boys and 200 girls, more than two-thirds of the
girls and half the boys being Moslems. She has a branch school of
ninety pupils at Damietta.


THE CHINESE.

—There are now between three and four hundred Christian schools in
China, containing over six thousand pupils.

—It is pointed out as a significant fact that the missions
in Japan, which have been so prosperous, were started by a
contribution sent by Christian converts of the Hawaiian Islands.

—There are in New York City and vicinity 500 Chinese laundries,
managed by about 2,000 Chinamen. No foreigners are more
industrious, more peaceable, or more anxious to conform to the laws
of the land. None are so reliable in their business arrangements or
so desirous for instruction in mission schools.

—There are at present in connection with Protestant missions in
China more than 600 stations and out stations; more than 300
organized churches, a goodly number of them self-supporting, and
some 20,000 communicants.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


WORK TRANSFERRED BY THE AMERICAN BOARD.

By vote of the Prudential Committee of the American Board, the
entire Dakota Mission was transferred to the American Missionary
Association, to take effect Jan. 1, 1883. We give the statistics
of the Mission as published in the last Annual Report of the
Board. But some of the churches in the list (especially those at
the Sisseton Agency) are reported as having transferred themselves
to the Presbyterian Board of Home Missions, prior to Jan. 1,
1883. When the Prudential Committee of the American Board and the
officers of the Presbyterian Board of Home Missions have decided
the questions on this subject, which seem to be at issue between
them, we will correct the list accordingly, if any change shall be
found necessary.

Fort Berthold (Dakota Territory).—Chas. L. Hall, _Missionary_; Miss
Eda L. Ward, Miss Sophronia B. Pike, _Assistant Missionaries_. One
church at Devil’s Lake, sixteen members.

Fort Sully (Dakota Territory). Peoria Bottom.—Thomas L. Riggs,
_Missionary_; Miss Mary C. Collins, Miss Louisa M. Irvine,
_Assistant Missionaries_. One church, twenty-four members.

Cheyenne River.—Isaac Renville, Stephen Yellow Hawk, David Lee,
_Native Pastors_; Mrs. Renville, Samuel Hopkins, Mrs. Hopkins, Mrs.
Elizabeth Winyan, _Native Teachers_.

Santee Agency (Nebraska).—Alfred L. Riggs, _Missionary_; James C.
Robbins, Joseph H. Steer, Mrs. Mary B. Riggs, Mrs. Maria L. Steer,
Miss Martha M. Paddock, Miss Susan Webb, Miss Sarah L. Voorhees,
Miss Harriet B. Ilsley, _Assistant Missionaries_; Miss Harriet A.
Brown, Miss Lizzie Glisan, Miss ——, _Teachers_; Artemas Ehnamini,
_Native Pastor_; Eli Abraham. _Native Teacher_; John Cetanmani,
Dennis Mazaadidi, James Brown, James Redwing, _Catechists_. One
church, one hundred and seventy members.

Sisseton Agency (Dakota Territory).—Stephen R. Riggs, LL.D.,
_Missionary_; W. K. Morris, Mrs. Annie B. Riggs, Mrs. Martha Riggs
Morris, _Assistant Missionaries_; Miss Thompson, Mrs. John B.
Renville, _Teachers_; John B. Renville, Daniel Renville, Louis
Mazawakinyanna, David Greycloud, Joseph Iron Door, Charles R.
Crawford, _Native Pastors_. Six churches, four hundred and ten
members.

4 stations; 9 out-stations; 9 churches; 4 missionaries; 3 American
male assistant missionaries; 12 female assistant missionaries; 5
other teachers; 10 native pastors; 9 native teachers and catechists.

We add the statistics of the Indian work as sustained by the
Association during the past year.

S’Kokomish Agency (Washington Territory).—Rev. Myron Eells,
_Missionary_.

Spokan Falls (Washington Territory).—Rev. H. T. Cowley,
_Missionary_.

Leech Lake Agency (Minnesota).—Rev. S. G. Wright, _Teacher_.

Hampton (Virginia).—Miss Isabel B. Eustis, _Teacher_; and
appropriation in aid of Indian students.

       *       *       *       *       *


SUGGESTIONS OF ENLARGEMENT.

We believe that those who read in this number of the Missionary the
communications from Capt. Pratt, Gen. Armstrong and Prof. Riggs
may ask with good reason, Why not develop at Santee an industrial
school for the Indians, of like character to those at Hampton
and Carlisle? Already fair beginnings have been made. As will be
seen by a cut published herewith, we have good grounds, several
attractive and suitable buildings, with other improvements. By
an examination of a map with reference to the location of the
different Indian tribes, it will be found that Santee is accessible
to seven tribes, numbering over twenty thousand souls. The railroad
systems of the vicinity are such that no great difficulty or
expense would be experienced in bringing students together. The
tribes speaking the Dakota language number more than those speaking
any other Indian dialect on the continent. The churches already
established among them, with a membership of 847, are in full
sympathy with the Santee school. No difficulty is likely to come
from a lack of students, as already the institution has during the
present year been obliged to turn them away for want of room.

[Illustration: SANTEE NORMAL TRAINING SCHOOL.]

Mr. Thomas L. Riggs, who collected a company of Indian youth for
Gen. Armstrong’s school last autumn, reports that he could have
secured several times as many, if he had been seeking students for
Santee. The variety of industries that it would be desirable to
promote would be limited only by the wants of the people in a new
country. Carpentering, blacksmithing, shoemaking, broommaking and
basketmaking, are trades that well might receive early attention.
It would be no part of the plan to interfere with the religious or
normal school work by the more general introduction of industrial
training. We believe that Christian nurture is promoted rather
than retarded by attention to industrial pursuits among students,
when wise oversight is given for the sake of useful achievements.
The plan of locating the students in cottages, so that each home
may have a quiet and healthful influence upon the untutored youth
from wigwam life, is already inaugurated, and can be extended to
meet all emergencies. The land at the agency is controlled by the
government, but no difficulty is anticipated in securing all that
may be needed for the use of the school. Scholarships may also be
had in numbers and amount sufficient to warrant preparations on a
large scale for a first grade normal and industrial institute. It
is the purpose of this Association to weigh carefully the above
considerations, and if found practicable, to develop at an early
day a training school in Nebraska that shall be equal in its
facilities and enterprises to the demands of the new era in the
progress of Indian civilization.

       *       *       *       *       *


ASPECTS OF THE INDIAN PROBLEM.

BY HON. CARL SCHURZ.

The increased interest of public-spirited citizens in the education
of Indian children is one of the best, if not the best result,
of recent discussions of the Indian question. The success of the
schools at Hampton, in Virginia, Carlisle, in Pennsylvania, and
Forest Grove, in Oregon, have amply demonstrated what can be
accomplished if such schools be organized on the right principle
and conducted with ability and energy. That this is more and more
generally appreciated is all the more fortunate, as the Indian
question is no longer one the solution of which can be trusted to
time.

As the progress of settlement and enterprise in the far western
regions, or, as it is called in a general way, “the development
of the country,” advances, the old methods of providing for the
Indians become obsolete. Large reservations of wild land, on
which the Indian can freely roam and support himself, partly by
hunting, will soon be things of the past. Even now an “Indian
frontier” does no longer exist. The abiding places of the
Indians are almost everywhere surrounded by rapidly increasing
populations of white men eagerly pressing upon the Indian lands.
One reservation after another is broken up to make room for new
lines of communication and for agricultural and mining enterprises.
However conscientious the government may be in its intention and
endeavor to protect the rights of the Indians at all points, it
is evident that the Indians will soon, in every part of the
country, be interspersed with an aggressive force, constantly
growing in volume and power, which will threaten to overwhelm them
like a rising flood. Their circumstances are essentially changed.
The alternative of civilization or extermination is immediately
before them—civilization enabling them to become in all important
respects a part of the population among which they are to live; or
extermination in a vain struggle to maintain the habits of savage
life against the progress of superior forces, or rapid decay as
miserable paupers and outcasts by the failure of self-sustaining
ability. This alternative presents itself not as a question looming
up in the distant future, to be solved by coming generations, but
as a question involving the existence of the young generation of
Indians now living. It is, in one word, a question of immediate
urgency.

If the Indians are to live at all, they must learn to live like
white men. They can no longer stand in the way of the development
of the country, but they must be enabled to become part of that
development, and thus to be benefited by it. The “white man’s
way” of which they are in the habit of speaking, must not, as
heretofore, remain to them a mere vague, shadowy idea, but they
must acquire a practical conception of what the white man’s way
really is, what its objects are, and by what means those objects
are attained. They must acquire that conception soon, for they will
need it soon. The education of the young generation of Indians
is therefore an immediately pressing necessity. And it must be
an education that takes them out of their traditional ways of
thinking, out of their old ambitions and habits of life. They must
not only learn some reading and writing, but they must learn what
reading and writing is for in the practical competitions of human
existence. They must learn how to work and how to make their work
useful. They must learn to love work by seeing and appreciating the
fruits of it. Industrial training of a thoroughly practical kind
must therefore go hand-in-hand with the ordinary rudimentary school
education. The two things must be carried on with constant regard
to the unity of aim.

The schools at Hampton, Carlisle and Forest Grove are conducted
upon this principle, and the results attained there prove that
Indian youths can be taught the things required to provide for the
necessities of life and to lift the Indian above the state of the
pauper as well as of the savage. Of course we must not expect too
much of them. We must not expect that they will issue from these
schools as model men and model women in every respect. We must not
expect that on the average they will be better than the average of
white boys and girls, raised under the same circumstances and with
the same advantages or disadvantages, would be. In point of fact,
the reports about the young men and women who, after having gone
through their three years’ term at Hampton or Carlisle, returned
to their people in the western country, have been as different as
reports would be about white boys and girls similarly situated.
Some were bright, active and industrious, others dull and indolent.
But a large majority of them have been doing well and showed a
marked superiority in character, ambition and conduct over other
young Indians who had not enjoyed the same kind of education. There
is no doubt that their presence among their people as teachers
and examples and as a moving force generally will exercise a most
healthy and elevating influence, provided the number of Indians so
educated be large enough to make them among the rising generation
the rule, instead of their remaining exceptional cases, as they now
are. It is, therefore, essential that such schools and the number
of pupils in them be multiplied as much as possible.

The schools at Hampton and Carlisle are mentioned here in
preference to the schools established at the different agencies,
partly because the former are superior as to the force of teachers
employed there, as well as to their equipment in other respects,
and partly because they offer to their Indian pupils the peculiar
advantage of withdrawing them entirely from the savage influences
of the Indian camps and placing them under the immediate influence
of civilized surroundings, where they can learn the “white
man’s way,” by seeing civilization at work. But as this method
of educating young Indians is expensive, and Congress rather
parsimonious as to appropriations for such purposes, the number of
Indians profiting from it is necessarily very small in proportion
to the whole population, while it ought to be very large. The
establishment of an Indian school on the same plan near the Santee
agency in Nebraska, as contemplated by the American Missionary
Association, is therefore all the more to be welcomed. Although the
surroundings of that school will not be quite as civilized as those
of Hampton and Carlisle, yet the Santee reservation is at least on
all sides easily accessible to civilized influences. It is a small
tract, encircled by settlements of white people. At the same time,
a school established there will be able to draw its pupils from the
great Sioux reserve in Dakota at small cost, the distance being
inconsiderable and the means of communication cheap and convenient.
The American Missionary Association could scarcely render a more
valuable service to the Indian race or do more credit to its own
good judgment and benevolent impulses than by making so valuable an
addition to the educational forces among the red men.

       *       *       *       *       *

—A difficulty in prosecuting the work among the Indians in British
Columbia is found in the fact that the tribes speak distinct
languages. Not less than seven different dialects are used in the
range of country embraced by missionary effort.


ORIGIN AND HISTORY OF WORK AT CARLISLE.

BY CAPT. R. H. PRATT.

In compliance with your request I herewith furnish you with a brief
history of the Carlisle School, and some account of its industrial
features. It originated in the sending to Florida from the Indian
Territory of 74 Indian prisoners in the spring of 1875. At the
instance of General Sheridan I was selected by the War Department
and placed in charge of those prisoners, they having been under my
care at Fort Sill. They were from the Cheyenne, Arapahoe, Kiowa
and Comanche tribes and were selected for this banishment because
of well-known offenses against the peace of the frontier. Some
of them were guilty of the most outrageous crimes. Years of army
service among the Indians and observation of their treatment had
led me to change my views for opinions in favor of giving to the
Indian a broader chance and a desire that he might be brought more
in contact with the peaceful and industrious side of civilized
life, and so before the prisoners were started from Fort Sill I
wrote to my superiors urging that they be educated and trained
industrially during their imprisonment. Soon after reaching St.
Augustine I wrote repeatedly to the War Department urging that
some locality with more industrial surroundings be selected and
the prisoners be transferred. This was denied, and I then set
to work to make the best use of the elements to be found in the
sleepy old Spanish town. With no means, I was forced to seek the
co-operation of charitable and missionary folks. Miss S. A. Mather,
Miss Perit, Mrs. King Gibbs, Mrs. Couper Gibbs, of St. Augustine,
and Mrs. Dr. Caruthers of Tarrytown, N.Y., winter resident of St.
Augustine, volunteered to teach and did teach the classes of those
grown Indian men for two years and a half, giving them about one
hour’s instruction daily. Industrially there was little practical
opportunity, but numbers were placed for different periods to work
on saw mills, at picking oranges, as hostlers, grubbing the land,
boating and whatever could be found in connection with their own
necessities and comfort in the old fort. Twice we boated pine
logs from a distance and constructed log houses within the fort,
riving the clap-boards, building stick chimneys, chinking and
daubing that they might learn to construct their own homes. Some
of them advanced rapidly in acquiring literary, English speaking
and industrial knowledge. Others were very stupid. The greatest
success in the labor line was in placing five men to grub five
acres that had intimidated other laborers both white and black.
The undergrowth and roots to be removed were of the most dense and
appalling kind, and yet the Indians stuck to it until they had made
a complete success of it.

Another of the best evidences of the success of our labor efforts
was a petition signed by a very considerable number of laborers and
others of the community asking that I be estopped in the putting
of the Indians out to labor in competition with other classes, as
I was taking bread from the mouths of those who were dependent
upon such labor for their living, etc. In the spring of 1878 the
authorities at Washington determined to release the prisoners and
permit them to return to their homes. There were 22 of them who
preferred to remain East and get a better knowledge of civilized
life and more education before going home. The expenses of these
22 young men were undertaken by different charitable people. Gen.
S. C. Armstrong, of the Hampton Normal Institute, received 17 into
his institution, while four went to Paris Hill, near Utica, N.Y.,
under the immediate charge of Rev. J. B. Wickes, an Episcopal
clergyman, encouraged by Bishop Huntington, all the expenses being
undertaken by Mrs. Burnham. One was taken to Tarrytown, N.Y., in
Dr. Caruther’s own family. Hampton Institute being an industrial
school, furnished the most seasonable and practical education of
any institution I was able to find. The remainder of the party were
returned to their respective agencies, and such was the effect of
their training in Florida during their three years’ absence, that
they at once became the best element for progress in their tribes.
At this time, while a few have gone back to the blanket condition,
most likely from necessity, because no other way was open to them,
there is abundant testimony in the reports of their respective
agents during the past four years that they are still a useful and
leading industrious element among their people.

A few weeks after the arrival of the party at Hampton Institute,
General Armstrong was so favorably impressed by the conduct and
progress of the 17 he had undertaken, that he was willing to
increase the number by adding 50 more, and including girls. Mr.
Schurz and Mr. McCrary, then Secretaries of the Interior and War
Departments, accepted the proposition, and I was sent, in the fall
of 1878, to Dakota, and brought away 49 children from six different
agencies of the Sioux, Gros Ventre, Mandan and Arickeree tribes.
These, together with the former Florida prisoners, were placed
under training in all the varied systems of literary and industrial
pursuits. Hampton Institute provides liberally for its colored
students, and side by side with those colored pupils the Indian
boys and girls, in perfect harmony with the new life, demonstrated
their capacity to hold their own in improving the best of chances.
It was very much desired by the friends of this new movement, and
particularly General Armstrong, that I should remain with it, and a
clause was introduced in the army appropriation bill, which passed
Congress in the spring of 1879, for the detail of one officer,
not above the rank of captain, for duty with reference to Indian
education.

It was a plan which I had urged for several years that to get the
best results in our educational work among Indian children as
many as possible should be removed from reservation and tribal
influences and placed in the atmosphere of civilized life, and
to this end I had urged the use of vacant military posts and
barracks as furnishing, without much cost in changing and improving
buildings, places to make a beginning, and I proposed to the
Interior and War Departments that I would undertake the education
of 250 or 300 children at the old military buildings at Carlisle.
This proposition was accepted, and after many preliminaries I was
sent in September, 1879, to the Rosebud and Pine Ridge Agencies in
Dakota and brought away 84 children, and immediately after went to
the Indian Territory and from the Kiowa, Cheyenne, Pawnee and other
tribes brought 52 more. To these were added 11 from the Hampton
Institute of the young men who had been with me in Florida. The
school was opened on the first of November with 147 students. To
these were added from time to time children from various Western
tribes, and at the end of July, 1880, we numbered 239 children,
about one-third of whom were girls. At the end of the second
year, October, 1881, we had increased to 295. At the present
writing we number 379—132 girls and 247 boys. From the beginning
our principle has been to place the most emphasis on industrial
training, next English speaking and then literary training.
To accomplish the first we very early in the work established
shops for mechanical instruction in carpentry, blacksmithing,
wagon-making, harness-making, tailoring, tinsmithing, shoemaking,
printing, baking and on our farm of 115 acres gave some scope for
agricultural training. We have avoided theory in our industries and
adhered to practice, being governed to a great extent by the old
apprentice system. We have at the head of each branch a skilled
mechanic as practical instructor, and as nearly as possible we
pursue the methods of trades people in their instructions to
apprentices. We give half of each day to work and the other half to
school, and have found that our progress is proportionately greater
in each than it would be if the attention was directed to either
the one or the other for the whole time. Under this system we have
in training as carpenters 13 boys; as wagon-makers and blacksmiths,
15; as harness-makers, 15; as shoemakers, 19; as tailors, 12;
as turners, 11; as printers, 5; as bakers, 3; and every boy not
engaged at some trade is required to work during the season upon
the farm. Such products of our labors as we are not able to make
use of for the school are purchased by the Indian Department and
shipped to agencies. We think our boys as forward in capacity
for receiving instruction on each of the several branches as the
average white boy. In the blacksmith shop our apprentice boys after
two years’ instruction, are able to iron a wagon, repair a plow,
shoe a horse, etc. In the wood-working department able to get out
all the different wood parts of the wagon ready for the blacksmith.
In the tin-smithing to construct coffee pots, buckets, pails,
pans, cups, etc. In the harness-making to cut out and manufacture
harness. In the tailoring to cut out and manufacture clothing. In
shoemaking to repair and manufacture boots and shoes. In printing
to set up and distribute type and make up forms. In baking we have
no other help than Indians. We give to our girls instruction in the
various industries of the sex and find no general lack. In cooking,
sewing, house work, laundry work, etc., they are apt pupils.

One of the most useful features of our work has been the placing of
our boys and girls in private families, principally among farmers,
where they perform the same kind of labor and are subjected to the
same home and labor influences that white children of their own
ages receive. This has the most beneficial results. The children
take on English speaking and the industries of civilized life very
speedily. During vacation we place out all we can spare from our
own work, and during the winter we allow a considerable number to
remain and attend the public schools in the several neighborhoods,
they being required to do such work mornings and evenings as they
are capable of and so pay for their board and clothes. By this
course we are enabled to carry a very considerable number more
pupils than we are allowed appropriation for. It is plain that the
real hindrance to Indian progress is found in their being kept
entirely separated from the other masses of our population, and
by every act of our government and every sentiment of its people,
societies, missionary and others, made to feel that they are a
separate people and must so remain forever. Through their education
in separate schools, their home life upon prison reservations with
their liberty of coming and going abridged to these reservations,
with all their aspirations and ambitions so limited, there can be
no healthy growth. To overcome these difficulties the Indian mind
and the mind of the public as well as Congress must be educated to
grant to them the enlarged privileges accorded to all other races.
The boy will never learn to swim until he goes into the water,
and the experiences of industrial life and civilized life through
its associations and competitions will determine for the Indian
and white the true status. We have had quite enough of the Sioux,
Cheyenne, Comanche, etc., as Sioux, Cheyenne, Comanche, etc. We can
end their existence among us as such separate people by a broad
and generous system of English education and training, which will
reach all the 50,000 children and in a very few years remove all
our trouble from them as a separate people and as separate tribes
among us, and instead of feeding clothing and caring for them from
year to year, put them in condition to feed clothe and care for
themselves. Our experiences in many individual cases in the last
few years make it very evident that not only may we fit the Indian
to take care of himself in his own home, but may fit him to go and
come and abide in the land wherever he may choose, and so lose his
identity.

[Illustration: MANDAN HUT, DAKOTA.]


THE HISTORY AND OUTLOOK OF THE INDIAN WORK TRANSFERRED TO THE A. M.
A.

PROF. ALFRED L. RIGGS.

Just fifty years ago two Congregational young men from Connecticut,
the Messrs. Samuel and Gideon Pond, pressed on into the heart
of the then unknown continent to see what they could do for the
Indian. They landed at Fort Snelling, in what is now Minnesota, and
began their volunteer mission among an Eastern branch of the Dakota
or Sioux nation.

One year later the American Board sent out the Rev. Dr. Williamson
on a tour of exploration, and the next year after that a mission
was regularly established. The organized work gathered in the
volunteers, and, moreover, according to the fashion of the times,
Congregational relations disappeared and work was started on the
Presbyterian basis.

For years it was a slow, hard lift against the weight of heathenism
and pride of race. Nowhere is race pride stronger than among the
Indians. As is often the case, those who have least to be proud of
vaunt themselves the most. So, while the Indian has to acknowledge
that the white man is possessor of gifts that class him with the
gods (the Dakota name for white man being the same as that he
applies to his gods), and thus for the sake of his mysterious power
he fears him, yet personally he despises him as different from
himself and effeminate.

And heathenism! Some would have us believe that it did not exist;
that the Indian naturally was as good a Christian as need be. The
courtesy of the Indian perhaps leads to this deceptive view. He
will assent to everything you say rather than be so impolite as
to contradict you. Then, too, his pantheism easily makes room for
another god. So the white man’s god soon had his banner set up at
their sacred rites together with the Stone god, the Day god, the
Night god, the Thunder god, and the god of the North.

But when Christ claims the whole of their worship, and belief
in him is seen to require the giving up of their other faiths,
and the casting away of their charms and incantations, then the
antagonism of the unregenerate heart breaks out here as everywhere.
And the magicians and “medicine men” are stirred up to bitter and
unremitting warfare as soon as they discover that their craft is in
danger.

As if here were not enough obstacles to meet, there comes in
the opposition begotten of the selfishness and dissoluteness of
unprincipled white men. For years the fur trade was almost as
much the enemy of missions as was the slave trade. The agents of
this great enterprise were bound to keep the Indians hunters and
trappers in order that their warehouses might be filled with furs.
The fur trade also controlled the government, and even to-day its
power is felt through laws made then for its benefit and that yet
remain on the statute book. Hence in its day the fur trade was
a foe to be dreaded, for it could exert its power in a thousand
secret ways. It could break up schools, scare people away from
religious meetings, and put a ban on the Christian teacher, if
content to leave him alive.

After thirty years of patient labor the reward seemed about
to come. Christianity was proving its power to disintegrate
heathenism, break down prejudice and survive the enmity of
unprincipled white men.

Then the outbreak and massacres of 1862 occurred, seemingly
sweeping everything away. It was the death-struggle of heathenism,
alarmed at the steady advance of Christianity. Other political
causes and conditions merely made this outbreak possible. And yet
what seemed annihilation was only multiplication and dissemination.
Again was fulfilled the Scripture: “They that were scattered abroad
went preaching the word.” And the conversion in the military
prisons of hundreds as it were in a day, is one of the notable
instances of the power of God’s spirit.

Twenty years ago the field of Christian missions among the Dakotas
was confined to a small section of the nation then dwelling in
a corner of Minnesota. But now the field extends over the great
Missouri valley and on northward toward the Saskatchawan in the
British Possessions.

The work whose beginnings we have noted, originally one under the
American Board, has since been divided. In 1871, at the time of
the general division of the missions of the American Board, that
part of the Dakota Mission immediately under the charge of the
venerable Dr. Williamson and his son, Rev. John P. Williamson,
was transferred to the care of the Presbyterian Board of Foreign
Missions. But the larger portion remained with the other veteran
of the mission, Rev. Stephen B. Riggs, under the care of the
American Board. And now with the year 1883 another transfer is
made to the American Missionary Association. But the five native
churches, with a membership of 340, that had meanwhile grown up
about Sisseton Agency are graduated from foreign missions into a
home mission connection, and so naturally pass under the care of
the Presbyterian Home Mission Board. It is not within the scope
of this short article to speak of the work accomplished by the
Episcopal Mission in the same field, which had its beginning
about thirty years later than the original Dakota Mission, and in
recent years has had very considerable success. Nor can we speak
particularly of the portion of our great field lying across the
British line, for though we have furnished the native laborers it
is not organically connected with us. But as for the rest of the
original mission, even though divided, it works as one. It has one
General Conference, and in all its publications and matters of
common concern acts as one mission still.

The statistics of the Dakota Mission, as thus defined, show 7
stations, 6 ordained missionaries, 26 assistant missionaries, 13
churches, 12 native pastors and preachers, 9 native teachers, and
847 church members, contributing during the past year $779.83 for
their own missions among the heathen Indians, and $1,080.58 for
pastoral support and church expenses.

Of this there now passes directly to the care of the American
Missionary Association 5 stations, with also an interest in the
Native Missionary field at Devil’s Lake, 4 ordained missionaries,
21 assistant missionaries, 2 churches, Pilgrim Church at Santee
and Shiloh Church at the Sully Station, with 8 native preachers, 5
native teachers, and a church membership of 194.

As has been noticed, the organization of the work from the first
has been on the Presbyterian model, and thus the fruits of the
mission have mostly gone into the Presbyterian connection. The
church at the Fort Sully Station was an exception. It was organized
as a Congregational church. Nevertheless, this Presbyterian cast,
this whole native force, is to be considered as one, and will be
used by whichever denomination is ready to prosecute the work
most vigorously, for the denominationalism of these churches is
not of a radical type, as is instanced by the recent change of
ecclesiastical relations on the part of the Pilgrim Church at
Santee. This is the original mother church, but in order to come
into closer and more sympathetic relations with the churches that
support the Santee Training School, it voted cheerfully and almost
unanimously to leave Presbytery and become Congregational. Indeed
this is not hard for them to do, for Indians are naturally very
democratic.

In the work that may now be done for this people, SANTEE NORMAL
TRAINING SCHOOL must be an important factor. It has vital relation
to all these native churches, and it has a name among the heathen
communities. Its growth has been slow, for it has taken time and
work to instil the idea of a higher education into the minds of
the people. Henceforth its growth might be rapid. It now has one
hundred and one pupils in attendance, with seventeen instructors,
including those in charge of the industrial and boarding
departments. This winter a number of pupils have been turned away
for lack of room. If accommodations could be provided, the number
of pupils might soon be doubled.

While giving great attention to industrial training, it affords
unparalleled advantages for that training which is needed to make
teachers suited to Indian schools.

The school is the basis of evangelizing the Indian. There will be
no large audiences to preach to, except on exceptional occasions,
until the school has gathered a company of disciples. Certain
persons not understanding the nature of missionary work, or unable
to take more than a superficial view, have recently represented our
schools as of low grade, and unnecessary to real missionary work.
But this is contradicted by the grand progress of the work.

We have spoken of five mission stations as now passing under
the care of the A. M. A. But of these Standing Rock is hardly
opened, and Berthold and Sully stations are sadly in need of
reinforcements. And there are the large Indian Agencies of Spotted
Tail’s and Red Cloud’s tribes, numbering about 7,000 each, which
we ought to occupy. Then there is the Crow country in Montana,
next door to our Berthold Mission. We should have at once six
ordained missionaries and their wives, with as many more assistant
missionaries, all picked men. This would enable us to manage a yet
larger number of native missionary teachers working along with
them.

[Illustration: SISSETON GIRLS, WITH TEACHER.]

The tribes speaking the Dakota language are the most numerous of
any Indian people upon the continent. They are now universally
open to Christianity and Christian civilization. They now look to
Christian people for their future. Within the last ten or twelve
years the whole temper of their mind has changed. The noted chief,
Sitting Bull, is an illustration. Only a few years ago he hated the
very wind that blew from the direction of the white man’s country.
When the wind blew from the east he would send out the town crier
to say, “Get you all into your teepees. This is bad air from the
white man’s country.” But when it blew from the north his crier
would proclaim, “Come out and breathe the healthy air.” And once
when a woman of the tribe brought home a “rooster” from a distant
trading post to enliven the tedium of her labor, Sitting Bull heard
it crow and instantly dispatched his chief soldier to “soldier
kill” the woman, that is, cut up her tent and kill her horses, for
the crime of having that white man’s bird in the sacred precincts
of a Dakota camp. But now the same Sitting Bull is petitioning for
Christian teachers, and land, and domestic animals, and undoubtedly
would also welcome “the-bird-that-crows-in-the-morning.”

       *       *       *       *       *


INDIAN INDUSTRIES AT HAMPTON.

BY GEN. S. C. ARMSTRONG.

Every Indian boy who comes to Hampton is allowed his choice to
learn farming or a trade, and to select the trade he prefers, to
which he is expected to stick. They often wish to change after some
months, for they are a fickle people. While this is by no means
done as a matter of course, it has sometimes been found wise to do
so. A boy who could do nothing at blacksmithing made remarkable
progress in the wheelwright’s shop; one who is poor on the farm may
be good in the shoe-shop, and _vice versa_; but it does not do to
encourage shifting trades. The girls go through the same routine of
housework, cooking, cutting and making and mending clothes.

The boys are assigned to work as follows: carpenters, 15; painters,
1; tinsmiths, 6; shoe-makers, 13; harness-makers, 3; farmers, 13;
blacksmiths, 3; wheelwrights, 3; tailors, 1. A generous lady in New
York City has recently given $5,000 for an Indian workshop, which
will be completed and occupied by the first of April next, and be a
most satisfactory change from the shed in which they have for four
years uncomfortably worked at their trades.

Considering the past of the Indian, the disposition of our boys
and girls to work is remarkable. The general rule is to work from
seven to twelve o’clock, A.M., or from one to six o’clock, P.M.,
Saturday being holiday. Those who work mornings study afternoons,
and _vice versa_. All are paid, girls as well as boys, usually at
the rate of $2.50 per month, for to expect Indians to take a real
interest in their work without some compensation is absurd. It is
weak and foolish to reason that the skill they attain is enough
compensation. Human nature requires something more. On the other
hand they purchase all their underclothing and shoes with their
earnings, and are thus taught the use of money and the true value
of garments, and become quite skillful in buying. A school uniform
is provided for each one, made in our tailoring department.

Their appreciation of work is a direct contradiction to the
statement that an Indian hates to labor. Frequently boys who are
working a half-day at some trade will ask to be allowed to work the
entire day, including Saturday, so as to earn more and be better
able to take care of themselves when they go home. Their wages are
then increased and they go to night school. Every such application
is encouraging.

Especially those who make extra time in the shops are inclined to
save. They generally agree to draw but one-half of extra earnings,
the other half being saved to buy them tools and other outfit when
they shall finally leave school. We allow ten per cent. interest
on all such savings; they are quick to see the advantage of laying
up money. They seem to have no marked aptitude for special trades,
unless it be for work in leather, shoe and harness-making. Their
ancestors have dealt in this commodity more than in any other. They
take to all handiwork remarkably; while quick to learn, they are
slow to execute. They seldom bungle or “botch” a job. The first
pair of shoes made by an apprentice is always serviceable. An
Indian carpenter will make as good a mortise as a white one, but
will take three times as long. Our expert harness-maker says he can
do no better work than some of his boys, but they are very slow
about it. We are constantly making and selling carts made by Sioux
boys. They have made all our school benches, desks, wardrobes and
wash-stands, besides window-frames, etc., for the outside market.

We would be only too glad to make buggy or plow harness, single
or double, tin-ware of all kinds and brogan shoes for individuals
or institutions in the North or South, solely on the ground of
the merit and cheapness of the work done. A neat carriage harness
was made last summer for a lady in Newport, R.I. Of the 500 dozen
articles of tinware, 75 sets of double plow harness, and 2,000
pairs of men’s shoes made last year by our Indian boys for the
use of the Western tribes (ordered by the Indian Department at
the lowest contract prices of the previous year) the New York
inspectors reported: “They are as well and as strongly made, and
for actual service fully equal to any purchased by the Department.”

This year we are making an even larger amount of material for the
Indian Department, but at prices which little more than cover cost
of material. An outside private trade would be much more desirable.
We were paid for men’s brogans “extra” good leather, $1.22½ per
pair, boxed and delivered in New York City. Carlisle does even more
than Hampton in supplying Indians, and with excellent success.

Owing to bodily ailments, Indian labor is more unsteady than that
of Negroes. While in their own life they have endurance, a steady
routine of industry is new to them, and they are for our purposes
a rather feeble race: they find digging exhausting, but on the
hunter’s trail or on the warpath they are tireless when we would
soon be weary.

Unless every Indian child is educated to some occupation, teaching
is of little account. Hard work rather than the higher studies
gives them the best drill. As for all, so for Indians, home
influence is a great thing. After the best practical education they
are not fit for the loose, idle, dirty life of Indian camps any
more than any other children. What is to be done? The best success
with the thirty Sioux children who returned in October, 1881, to
their agencies (five of them girls) has been with those to whom the
agents gave separate rooms near the agencies, having their food
cooked and their life led separately. An efficient agent will, by
the care he takes, save four-fifths of our Indian graduates to
decent lives; a careless, weak agent (and not a third of the sixty
U.S. Indian Agents are first-class men) will lose four-fifths of
them. We cannot make men of them in three years, but can give them
a start in that time that a good agent can keep up, and lead them
to true success.

Here, more and more, we find the real trouble; not with the Indian,
but in our miserable system of paying so small salaries to Indian
agents that a competent one is the exception. The boy or girl
who goes home finds no strong, kind friend to advise and help;
the current of influence is against a Christian life. Here the
missionary is needed; never more than now.

Hampton, Carlisle and the many schools that are educating Indians
need to be supplemented by good agents and wise missionaries who
will help them to stand against the odds that would make the
new life they have chosen nest to impossible. Here is the point
of chief anxiety. Public sentiment must be felt at Washington
before it shall remove the chief stumbling-block to Indian
progress—poor agents. As Secretary Teller says in his last Report,
the Indians are chiefly on reservations, and must for the present
be treated there; to be gradually pushed upon lands of their own,
individually, by the efforts of wise men and the influence of
Christian education.


REVIVAL WORK AMONG INDIANS AT HAMPTON.

Miss Isabel B. Eustis, in giving an account of the revival meetings
at Hampton, writes as follows of the Indians:

Meanwhile at one end of the chapel there sat a company of one
hundred who took no part in the service. The Indian students
watched with wondering and wistful eyes the scenes around them.
“Pass me not, O Gentle Saviour,” they sang often in their own
services during these days, and the Lord heard their cry and turned
aside and called them too. Stago, our fiery little Apache boy,
heard his voice, and set hard to work to conquer his temper and
self-will. The quick-witted, ambitious, head-strong girl, whose
influence over the other scholars we dreaded, listened, and her
hard expression softened, and the stubborn will yielded, and with
gentleness and humility she met the daily requirements which had
often roused her rebellious spirit before. Shallow natures grew
earnest and proud, and we knew that there was one walking with the
Indian students too who could purify and inspire and help.

On Wednesday evening our senior Indian boy, of his own accord, left
his class and took his seat with the other Indian scholars. Waiting
his opportunity, he rose and called the attention of the school to
those who sat behind him. He reminded me of the darkness out of
which they had come, and of the dangers to which they must return.
He told us that they longed for a share in the blessing God was
giving the school, and asked our patience while they prayed to the
Father, and spoke of Him in a language we could not understand.

Kamnach rose first. Kamnach came to the school four years ago,
directly from his wild Indian life. His hair was uncut; he wore
Indian clothes; he had been always familiar with scenes of
bloodshed, and placed little value on human life. After three years
he went back to his home, a changed man we thought in appearance
and heart. But it was hard to stand among his savage comrades. He
plead to come back to school. He was a happy boy, when, less than
a year ago, he placed his foot again on Hampton soil. Poor boy! he
had yet to learn that always his worst temptations would come from
his own distorted heart. Some misunderstanding of his position as a
returned student, some distrust of those who were over him, and he
fell into passionate hatred, and was ready to commit a deliberate
and deadly crime. We thought his repentance would be quick and
deep, but not so. The first Sunday of the new year, the anniversary
of the day on which he confessed Christ, he had no heart to meet
the Lord, whose first command was to love and forgive. But the
passing Saviour’s voice reached him now. He stood before the
crowded school, and with the help of an interpreter acknowledged
his sin, and renewed his allegiance to the Saviour, and begged the
Indian students to follow the Lord Jesus, though they would find
many things in His religion hard to understand and difficult to do.

After Kamnach’s confession a Sioux boy made a prayer. He spoke in
another tongue, but more than one felt his heart was lifted to the
Father’s heart by the earnestness and pathos of the stranger’s
voice. Another tried to speak in broken English. Missing the
words he wanted to say, waiting and struggling for confession,
he acknowledged Jesus Christ as the Saviour of his soul. Our
hearts were knit together in love. We knew that we belonged to one
common family and nothing could separate from the love of Christ.
Evidently the son of God who came to save the lost finds nothing in
the Indian nature he cannot soften and subdue. Evidently the Indian
is able to place his confidence in such a Saviour and yield himself
in glad obedience to Him.




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: INDIAN HUT.]


THE LITTLE INDIAN OF CLEAR LAKE.

ABRIDGED FROM GOSPEL IN ALL LANDS.

Did you ever see an Indian—a real, live Indian—in bead-embroidered
buck-skin coat and breeches, girded with a curiously wrought
wampum belt, shod with moccasins, his face painted black and red,
his hair bristling, like a porcupine’s back, with a gay forest of
feathers—as he dashed through the woods or over the prairie, on a
wild horse, or strode along proudly on foot, with bow and arrows in
his hands, and a large tomahawk and scalping-knife in his girdle?

You have seen him in the pictures, at least, and thought him a fine
sight; and perhaps you felt in your heart that it must be fine to
live such a wild, daring life, hunting, fishing and roaming in the
woods and over the fields.

But all Indians are not like him. Tribes differ very much in their
character and habits. Besides, they are never quite so brave and
fine in real life as they are in pictures. Most of them are poor
miserable creatures; and if you should go into one of their wigwams
of sticks and barks, and see their naked bodies, filthy faces and
tangled hair, as they squat in the smoke and stench around a little
fire, on the bare earth, in the middle of the shanty, snatching at
poor food with dirty fingers, like a pack of ravenous wolves. I do
not believe you would think it very fine, ever after have the least
desire to live like an Indian.

The little boy of our story was born and lived on the shores of
Clear Lake, a fine sheet of water among the mountains, thirty or
forty miles north of Napo Valley.

Like all his mates, he was so short and thick that he seemed to
be about as broad as he was long. His skin was not copper-colored
like that of most other Indians, but black. His face was broad and
round, his lips thick and pouting, and his nose wide and flat.
His long coarse hair, all tangled and matted, dangled around his
high cheek-bones and above his naked shoulders, like the shaggy
mane of a Canadian pony, and half hid his coarse, brutal features:
a pair of small, round, dull eyes, like leaden bullets, made the
treacherous expression that slept in every line of his features
seem ten-fold more revolting.

His wigwam, or lodge, was nothing but a rude screen of bushes or
skins to break the force of the wind. You would not think it very
nice or comfortable, but he did, and could sleep just as well
there, or on the ground beside a large stone, or behind the stump
of a fallen tree as you do on the softest feathers. But he never
slept two nights in the same place, for fear of being discovered by
an enemy and murdered.

It is a hard and cheerless life which those little Indian children
lead, as you can easily see, but the life of this little Indian was
especially so; for his father and mother had both been murdered,
and he had no friends to care for him any more kindly than they
would care for a dog; and even the _Hias Tyee_, or Big Chief of the
tribe, whose duty it was to see that this little waif on the stormy
sea of Indian life was provided for, thought only to get some
advantage out of him; and so, when he saw a white man camping one
day on the shores of the lake, he brought down the boy and offered
to sell him for ten dollars. It proved to be a kind, good-hearted
man, who saw that the little fellow was friendless and forlorn,
and so the bargain was soon closed, and he became servant to the
“pale-face” till he was twenty-one years old, on condition of
receiving his food and clothing.

On reaching home, the first thing, of course, was to clip off his
dangling locks, give him a thorough scrubbing with soap and brush,
and cover his black nakedness with decent clothing.

That afternoon, when the pigs were fed, he was found with his nose
in the trough eating sour milk with the animals as if he had been
one of them. At night nothing could persuade him to sleep in a room
or on a bed; and after dark, when the family had retired to rest,
he stole out of the house as slyly as a cat, and hid himself away
in the tall weeds beside the fence. Every night for many weeks he
did the same, and was so fearful of being murdered in his sleep
that he changed his nest every night, never daring to sleep twice
in the same spot.

His tongue was constantly telling lies, and he would steal
everything he fancied that came in his way. He seemed to have no
idea of right and wrong. He could not comprehend what such words as
love and duty and kindness meant. Fear was the only motive which
had the least influence in controlling him. Even the difference
between cleanliness and dirt was a thought too sublime and profound
for his understanding.

But he could believe in ghosts and haunting spirits of dead men,
like most other ignorant and barbarous people; and he thought they
lingered around every stump and tree, and followed him wherever he
went. He could hear them fluttering in the leaves, or rapping on
the limbs and trunks of the trees, or whispering in the wind. He
supposed they took possession of the bodies of men and animals, and
caused them to sing and dance, and do all sorts of silly tricks,
by a kind of inspiration. He had some notions of the Great Spirit,
it is true, but they were confused and indistinct, and had little
power over him, while a slavish fear of the inferior spirits and
other such ghostly nonsense tormented him night and day, and made
him a timid, miserable, degraded, creature.

Had you seen him in that condition you would have thought it
impossible to make anything good out of such a stupid little
animal. You would have said it was of no use to try to teach a
creature so brutal and superstitious anything about God and heaven,
and a higher life, or even about the decencies of civilized society.

But a kind lady took him under her care. She taught him to read and
write. She showed him the folly of believing in ghosts, and talking
with the spirits. She told him the story of Jesus, and made him
learn the ten commandments, and the precious words of the Saviour,
and explained to him how God made him, and fed, and clothed, and
kept him, day by day, and that he ought to love Him, and do right
in return for His kindness. She impressed him with the thought that
God is angry with wicked boys and girls every day, and that only
the pure in heart, whose lives are good, can be happy on earth, or
go to heaven when they die.

At first he was stupid and stubborn, and unwilling to learn; but
after a little while his stolid face began to brighten, his dull
eyes sparkled with unusual interest, and he was more and more
attentive, till his coarse, animal features wore an entirely new
expression. One day he came in with a very serious look, and said
in an earnest tone:

“Mistress, oh me got bad heart! Ask Great Spirit to give me better
heart.”

He was told to ask for himself; and then the poor little child of
the Great Father went into his own room alone and shut the door,
and kneeled down beside the bed and prayed, oh! so earnestly, that
God would forgive his sins for Jesus’ sake, and take away his
wicked feelings, and show him how to be good. From that moment he
was a changed boy. His bad habits were all laid aside. He ceased
to be stupid and stubborn and inattentive. He told no more lies,
and pilfered no more. His face glowed with kindly feeling, as if a
ray from heaven were sleeping on it. His coarse features lost their
repulsive expression and became rather pleasant to see. I am sure
there was rejoicing in heaven that day over this little stray lamb
from the wilderness; and I do not doubt that when God gathers up
his jewels from the earth the poor Indian boy will be a precious
gem in the Saviour’s crown of glory.




RECEIPTS FOR FEBRUARY, 1883.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $261.26.

    Augusta. South Cong. Ch. and Soc., 55 (30 of
      which from Barrett E. Potter to const. REV.
      HENRY V. EMMONS L. M.); “A Friend,” 5                  $60.00
    Blue Hill. Bbl. of C., _for Wilmington, N.C._
    Brownsville. Cong. Ch.                                    18.00
    Brunswick. Bbl. of C., val. 20, and 2.56 for
      freight, _for Selma, Ala._                               2.56
    Camden. E. D. Mansfield, 6; A. Howe and Wife,
      3; J. H., 1                                             10.00
    Gardiner. Two Bbls. of C., and 4.25 for
      freight, _for Selma, Ala._                               4.25
    New Sharon. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00
    Portland. Rev. I. P. Warren, D.D., 50, to
      const. MISS E. A. STANWOOD L. M.; Plymouth
      Ch., 43, to const. C. S. D. GRIFFEN L. M.               93.00
    Scarborough. “Friend in Cong. Ch.”                        50.00
    Skowhegan. “Friends,” by Mrs. L. W. Weston,
      _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                            8.00
    South Berwick. Ladies of Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      Bbl. of C., _for Wilmington, N.C._
    Union. Bbl of C., _for Selma, Ala._
    West Falmouth. Bbl. of C. and 2.25 _for
      Freight, for Selma, Ala._                                2.25
    Woolwich. “Morning Glories”                                3.20
    ——. “A Friend.”                                            5.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $419.05.

    Claremont. “Friends,” by Miss L. D. Fairbank,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           16.00
    Concord. North Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C. _for
      Tougaloo U._
    Exeter. “A Friend”                                        30.00
    Fisherville. “Friends,” to const. JOHN C.
      PEARSON L.M.                                            30.00
    Francestown. Cong. Ch., 20; Aaron Fisher, 5               25.00
    Goffstown. Cong. Ch., Box of C. _for Marion,
      Ala._
    Lancaster. Cong. Ch.                                      10.13
    Littleton. Mrs. B. W. Kilborn                              5.00
    Londonderry. C. S. P.                                      1.00
    Lyme. ——                                                  11.00
    Manchester. First Cong. Ch., to const. GEO. W.
      O. TEBBITTS L. M.                                       58.16
    Mount Vernon. Cong. Ch.                                    6.72
    Newport. Cong. Ch.                                        77.11
    Pittsfield. Cong. Ch., 20.93; Dr. John Wheeler
      and Wife, 10                                            30.93
    Sanbornton. Cong. Ch.                                     15.00
    ——. “A Friend”                                             3.00
                                                            -------
                                                            $319.05

    LEGACY.

    Londonderry. Estate of Josiah Sleeper, by
      James C. Taylor, Admr.                                 100.00
                                                            -------
                                                            $419.05


  VERMONT, $289.64.

    Barnet. Sab. Sch. Scholars                                 5.00
    Bennington. Second Cong. Ch.                              73.67
    East Corinth. Cong. Sab. Sch.                              5.18
    Essex Center. Mrs. L. C. B.                                0.50
    Greensborough. Cong. Ch.                                  17.00
    Hubbardton. Mrs. James Flagg, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    McIndoes Falls. Cong. Ch.                                 13.00
    Morgan. L. L.                                              0.50
    Pittsford. Cong. Ch.                                      48.50
    Saint Albans. First Cong. Ch.                             65.25
    Strafford. Cong. Ch.                                      25.00
    Wallingford. Cong. Ch. and Soc., Bbl. of C.,
      1.65, _for Freight, for Tougaloo, Miss._                 1.65
    West Hartford. Cong. Ch.                                   6.22
    Wilton. Cong. Ch.                                          2.50
    Windham. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   4.20
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             16.47
    Ladies of Benson, Greensborough, New Haven,
      Rochester and West Townshend, Basted
      patchwork, _for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._


  MASSACHUSETTS, $1,842.51

    Adams. Sab. Sch. Class, Cong. Ch., by W. B.
      Green                                                   12.00
    Amesbury and Salisbury. Union Evan. Ch. and
      Soc.                                                     4.07
    Amherst. “A Friend,” by Miss E. W. Beaman,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           20.00
    Andover. Free Ch., _for furnishing, Straight
      U._                                                     40.00
    Auburndale. Rev. Calvin Cutter, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Bernardston. Ladies, Patchwork, _for Storrs
      Sch., Atlanta. Ga._
    Billerica. Orthodox Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                 4.50
    Boston. Mrs. Nancy B. Curtiss, 200; “Boston,” 1          201.00
    Boston. Cong. Pub. Soc., Pkg. Singing Books,
      _for Macon, Ga._
    Curtisville. Mrs. Frances M. Clarke                        2.00
    Dalton. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             50.00
    Dracut. Center Cong. Ch.                                  10.00
    East Somerville. Mrs. Buswell’s S. S. Class,
      Franklin St. Ch., _for Santee Agency, Dakota
      M._                                                     10.00
    East Somerville. Young Ladies’ Mission Circle,
      Franklin St. Ch., _for Student Aid, Dakota
      M._                                                     50.00
    Fall River. Third Cong. Ch.                               21.80
    Fitchburg. Rollstone Ch., Bbl. Stores, _for
      furnishing room, Straight U._
    Gilbertville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           10.00
    Great Barrington. E. P.                                    0.50
    Hadley. First Ch. Sab. Sch., 15.62; Mrs. D. H.
      Dickinson, 4.50                                         20.12
    Harwich. “Ready and Willing Band,” 2 Bbls. of
      C., one Val., 25, _for Atlanta, Ga._; one
      Val. 35, _for Marietta, Ga._
    Haverhill. West Cong. Ch.                                  7.56
    Ipswich. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. C, _for Atlanta
      U._
    Jamaica Plain. Central Cong. Ch. (_Special_)              50.00
    Leverett. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                        5.00
    Littleton. “A Friend”                                     50.00
    Littleton. “Friends,” _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             10.00
    Lowell. Eliot Ch., 60; L. Kimball, 50                    110.00
    Maplewood. Ladies’ Social Union, Bbl. of C.
      and 1 for freight, _for Wilmington, N.C._                1.00
    Maynard. Pkg. Papers
    Millbury. M. D. Garfield                                   5.00
    Newburyport. Miss Tyler, 5; S. S. Class, 1,
      _for Washington, D.C._                                   6.00
    Newton Highlands. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 2.95,
      and Eleven Comforters, _for Fisk U._                     2.95
    New Salem. Cong. Ch.                                      10.02
    Northampton. A. L. Williston                             500.00
    Northfield. W. S. E. Shaw, Box C. and 1, _for
      Macon, Ga._                                              1.00
    North Beverly. Second Cong. Sab. Sch.                      6.00
    Peru. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                      6.00
    Princeton. Cong. Ch.                                       7.00
    Shelburne Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 10.79;
      Rev. G. A. P., 1                                        11.79
    Southborough. Pilgrim Evan. Ch.                           13.09
    South Boston. E. St. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    6.00
    South Braintree. A. P. W.                                  1.00
    South Royalston. Second Cong. Ch.                         12.12
    South Wellfleet. Second Cong. Ch.                          2.00
    Springfield. Memorial Ch., 44; Mrs. R. K., 50c            44.50
    Sterling. Cong. Ch.                                        3.15
    Tewksbury. Cong. Ch.                                      11.00
    Townsend. Cong. Ch.                                        8.72
    Upton. A. W. Aldrich                                       4.70
    Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                  44.34
    Watertown. “Friends”                                       5.00
    Westborough. Evan. Cong. Ch.                              84.75
    Wellesley Hills. Ladies Charitable Soc. of
      Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., Val. 54, _for
      Talladega C._
    Westminster. ——                                           10.00
    Worcester. M. Wheeler, Pkg. Pamphlets
    Westborough. “Friends,” by Freedmen’s Aid
      Soc., _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                     20.00
    West Boxford. Cong. Ch.                                    6.00
    Westfield. “Girls’ Guild” of Second Cong. Ch.,
      _for Dakota Home_                                       31.50
    West Springfield. First Cong. Ch., 31; Park
      St. Ch., 15                                             46.00
                                                           --------
                                                          $1,649.18

    LEGACY.

    Woburn. Estate of Sarah H. Holden, by Geo. H.
      Holden, Adm.                                           193.33
                                                           --------
                                                          $1,842.51


  RHODE ISLAND, $72.56.

    Central Falls. Cong. Ch.                                  66.56
    Newport. D. B. Fitts                                       5.00
    Providence.——-, _for Washington, D.C._                     1.00


  CONNECTICUT, $1,394.10.

    Andover. “A Friend.”                                      11.50
    Berlin. “J. W.”                                           10.00
    Canton Center. Wm. G. Hallock                              5.00
    Colchester. “A Sister in First Cong. Ch.,”
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                 3.00
    Durham. Dea. Gaylord Newton, 5; H. N. Fowler, 5           10.00
    Enfield. First Cong. Ch., _for Library,
      Straight U._                                            25.00
    Glenville. “A Widow.”                                      0.50
    Hartford. Mrs. E. Hills                                  400.00
    Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Hebron. “A. H. P.,” _for Student Aid, Tougaloo
      U._                                                     10.00
    Ledyard. Cong. Ch.                                        15.30
    Meriden. Ida Pinks’ Class. First Cong. Ch.
      Sab. Sch., _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                 1.00
    Meriden. Homer Curtiss, 1 Doz. Table Forks,
      _for Atlanta U._
    Middle Haddam. Second Cong. Ch.                           21.20
    New Fairfield. Cong. Ch.                                  12.60
    New London. “P. O. H.”                                     2.00
    Newtown. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
    Northville. Miss E. R., _for Lady Missionary,
      Atlanta, Ga._                                            1.00
    Norwich. Second Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. Miss’y
      Soc., _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                     50.00
    Norwich. First Cong. Ch.                                   5.05
    Plantsville. Dea. T. Higgins, _for Atlanta U._           100.00
    Plantsville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Tillotson
      C. and N. Inst._                                        15.00
    Pomfret. First Cong. Ch.                                  53.00
    Salisbury. Cong. Ch.                                      53.97
    Terryville. A. G. Gaylord, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                50.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      36.88
    Thompson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              15.60
    Tompsonville. T. I. Pease, _for Library
      Straight U._                                            33.50
    Unionville. First Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._           27.98
    Warren. First Cong. Ch.                                   40.25
    Waterbury. First Cong. Ch.                               206.40
    West Brook. Cong. Ch., to const. ERNEST E.
      SPENCER L. M.                                           37.37
    West Suffield. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for S. S.,
      Straight U._                                             5.00
    Woodbury. Mrs. J. E. B. S., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                 1.00
                                                           --------
                                                          $1,294.10

    LEGACY.

    New London. Trust Estate of Henry P. Haven,
      _for Furniture, Straight U._                           100.00
                                                           --------
                                                          $1,394.10


  NEW YORK, $2,836.72.

    Auburn. John F. Hemenway                                   2.00
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Missionaries at Fernandina, Fla., and
      Ladies’ Island, S.C._                                  175.00
    Brooklyn. “An Oberlin Student of 1835,” _for
      Lady Missionary, Atlanta, Ga._                          10.00
    Brooklyn. “A Lady, by Aunt Patience,” 5 and
      bundle of patchwork, _for Lady Missionary,
      Wilmington, N.C._                                        5.00
    Canandaigua. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     57.28
    Clarkson. Oliver Babcock                                   5.00
    Clifton Springs. Mrs. H. L. C                              1.00
    Comstock’s. Russell Ranney                                 5.00
    Greenville. F. H. W.                                       0.50
    Hamilton. Second Cong. Ch.                                17.48
    Homer. Cong. Ch., 153.10; Cong. Sab. Sch., 10            163.10
    Honeoye. Cong. Ch., 42.40; Sab Sch., 10                   52.40
    Lockport. First Cong. Ch., 7; and Sab. Sch.,
      75, to const. MRS. L. A. DIETRICKS and MISS
      JENNIE DUQUETTE L. Ms                                   82.00
    Maine. Cong. Ch., 11.35; Sab. Sch., 4.50;
      “Pastor,” 4.15                                          20.00
    Mexico. G. W. French, _for Student Aid, Lewis
      High Sch._                                               2.00
    Morristown. Cong. Ch.                                      4.27
    Munnsville. T. B. Rockwell                                 5.00
    New York. F. P. Shumway                                    5.00
    New York. D. Appleton & Co., 75 Copies Fourth Reader
    Ovid. David W. Kinne                                       4.50
    Parma. Mrs. Anna Hathaway, _for Lady
      Missionary, Atlanta, Ga._                                3.00
    Union Falls. Mrs. Fanny D. Duncan, 10.,
      Francis E. Duncan, 10                                   20.00
    Volney. First Cong. Ch.                                   18.00
    Walton. First Cong. Ch.                                   61.33
    Warsaw. Cong. Soc., 24.77, and Sab. Sch., 33.14           57.91
    Waterville. Ladies Benev. Soc., 19.35 and Box
      of C., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                       19.35
    West Bloomfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       37.60
    West Bloomfield. Cong. Ch. Bbl. of C., _for Fisk U._
    West Chazy. Daniel Bassett                                 3.00
                                                             ------
                                                            $836.72

    LEGACY.

    New York. Estate of Francis P. Schoals, by
      Trustees                                             2,000.00
                                                           --------
                                                          $2,836.72


  NEW JERSEY, $46.00.

    Newark. “A Friend”                                         5.00
    Newark. Benev. Assn. of Park Presb. Ch., _for
      furnishing Room, Straight U._                           35.00
    Newark. Mrs. M. G. B., _for John Brown Steamer_            1.00
    New Brunswick. Mrs. S. L. Chester                          5.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $25.50.

    Coudersport. “Friends”                                     5.00
    East Springfield. Mrs. C. J. Cowles                        1.50
    Hermitage. W. F. Stewart                                   5.00
    Summersville. Horace Summers                              11.00
    Wurtemburgh. Mrs. M. Lacey, 2; Mrs. D. U. L., 1            3.00


  OHIO, $131.50.

    Atwater. Ladies, by Mrs. J. M. White, _for
      Books, Straight U._                                      6.50
    Bellefontaine. Mrs. J. L., _for Lady
      Missionary, Atlanta, Ga._                                1.00
    Chagrin Falls. “Earnest Workers” _for Student
      Aid, Tougaloo U._                                       10.00
    Cincinnati. F. W. C. Crane                                 2.00
    Columbus. Ladies Miss’y Soc. of First Cong.
      Ch., 15; Mrs. James L. Bates, 5                         20.00
    Columbus. C. Coit, _for Library, Macon Ga._                5.00
    Harrison. Dr. John D. Bowles                               5.00
    Newark. Mr. and Mrs. Lewis Jones                           4.50
    Norwalk. “A Friend”                                       15.00
    Oberlin. Harris Lewis                                      5.00
    Pittsford. “D.”                                            1.00
    South Salem. Daniel S. Pricer                              5.00
    Tallmadge. Rev. L. Shaw, Pkg. Bibles and
      Testaments
    Toledo. Edson Allen, _for Lady Missionary,
      Raleigh, N.C._                                           5.00
    Wakeman. Second Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   38.50
    West Farmington. Cong. Sab. Sch.                           7.00
    Youngstown. J. D. W.                                       1.00


  INDIANA, $1.00.

    Michigan City. “Golden Links of Cong. Ch.”
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta, U._                           1.00


  ILLINOIS, $653.54.

    Aurora. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Avon. Mrs. C. W.                                           1.00
    Batavia. C. N. Cooper                                      5.00
    Belvidere. M. C. Foote                                     2.50
    Camp Point. Mrs. Anna Reynolds                            50.00
    Chicago. First Cong. Ch., 142.06; New Eng.
      Ch., 62.55; Mrs. E. F. Rice, 5                         209.61
    Farmington. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                            7.75
    Freeport. L. A. Warner                                    25.00
    Galesburg. First Ch. of Christ                            26.70
    Knoxville. W. A.                                           1.00
    Millburn. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                                5.00
    Moline. Thomas Jewett, 50 _for Agricultural
      Implements_, 50 _for Student Aid, Tougaloo
      U._                                                    100.00
    Morris. Cong. Ch., 18; Sab. Sch., 2.25                    20.25
    Nora. G. W. Warner                                         5.00
    Oak Park. Boys’ Class in Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              19.10
    Paxton. “A Friend”                                        25.00
    Paxton. Cong. Sab. Sch., 1.50; “A Friend,” 9,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           10.50
    Quincy. Joshua Perry                                      10.00
    Sheffield. A. W. Boyden (New Year’s Offering)            100.00
    Sheffield. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                             5.13


  MICHIGAN, $271.82.

    Ann Arbor. First Cong. Ch.                                77.12
    Detroit. Woodward Av. Sab. Sch.                           67.00
    Grand Rapids. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rev. J. H.
      H. Sengstacke_                                          10.00
    Hubbardston. Cong. Ch.                                     4.00
    Kalamazoo. J. W. S., _for John Brown Steamer_              1.00
    Lansing. Prof. R. C. Kedzie                               10.00
    Muskegon. Cong. Ch.                                       30.00
    Olivet. Cong. Ch., 25.35; Mrs. M. R., 50c                 25.85
    Parma. Mrs. M. B. Tanner                                   2.00
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
    Portland. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           10.00
    Saint Johns. First Cong. Ch.                              18.85
    Utica. “Member of First Cong. Ch.”                        10.00
    Vermontville. Mrs. H., _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst._       1.00


  IOWA, $253.97.

    Cedar Rapids. Mrs. R. D. Stephens, _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           25.00
    Clinton. First Cong. Ch.                                  40.00
    Denmark. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  46.93
    Dubuque. First Cong. Ch.                                  60.50
    Grinnell. Woman’s Miss’y Soc. of Plym. Ch.,
      _for Lady Missionary, New Orleans, La._                 30.00
    Lansing. Lizzie H. Avery                                   5.00
    Magnolia. Cong. Ch., 20; Sab. Sch., 5                     25.00
    Marion. “Willing Workers,” _for Straight U._              12.00
    Montour. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc.                               5.75
    Wittenbergh. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               3.79


  WISCONSIN, $222.77.

    Beloit. Second Cong. Ch., 25.67; “Sale of
      Beads,” 5                                               30.67
    Brandon. “Busy Bees,” 9.40; Cong. Sab. Sch.,
      7.10, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                    16.50
    Columbus. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Montgomery, Ala._                            8.50
    Cooksville. Edward Gilley                                  5.00
    Eau Claire. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     25.00
    Fox Lake. Cong. Ch.                                       10.88
    Green Bay. First Presb. Ch.                               20.47
    Kenosha. R. M.                                             0.50
    Menasha. Cong. Ch.                                        30.00
    Menomonee. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   12.75
    Milwaukee. Sixth St. Cong. Sab. Sch.                      10.00
    Sheboygan. “Friends,” Box Books and Papers,
      and 2, _for Macon, Ga._                                  2.00
    Stoughton. Mrs. E. B. S.                                   0.50
    ——. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._             50.00


  MINNESOTA, $142.65.

    Leech Lake. Henry J. King to const. MRS. SARAH
      L. KING L. M.                                           30.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 22.65
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., _for Straight U._              59.00
    Minneapolis. Pilgrim Ch. Sab. Sch. _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   30.00
    St. Paul. Miss A. B., _for Lady Missionary,
      Atlanta, Ga._                                            1.00


  MISSOURI, $1.00.

    St. Louis. Rev. C. L. G.                                   1.00


  KANSAS, $40.40.

    Burlington. Cong. Ch.                                     15.00
    Garden City. Cong. Ch.                                     2.75
    Great Bend. Second Cong. Ch.                               5.25
    Manhattan. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                      17.40


  NEBRASKA, $7.72.

    Ashland. Cong. Ch.                                         5.72
    Maniland. Cong. Ch.                                        2.00


  OREGON, $10.00.

    The Dalles. First. Cong. Ch.                              10.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $13.00.

    Washington. Mrs. A. N. Bailey, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Washington. “Little Rills of Llensmary,” by
      Rev. M. Porter Snell                                     2.00
    Washington. “Friend,” _for Washington, D.C._               1.00


  KENTUCKY, $95.80.

    Berea. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown Steamer_                 7.05
    Williamsburgh. Tuition                                    88.75


  TENNESSEE, $468.30.

    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch.                                   212.50
    Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition                              255.80


  NORTH CAROLINA, $216.30.

    Raleigh. Tuition                                           0.80
    Wilmington. Normal Sch., Tuition, 210.50;
      Cong. Ch., 5                                           215.50


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $10.00.

    Charleston. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00


  GEORGIA, $719.10.

    Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition, 192.84; Rent, 3           195.84
    Atlanta. First Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                    52.50
    Atlanta. First. Cong. Ch., 55 _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._, and 10.50 _for Student
      Aid, Storrs Sch._                                       65.50
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition 153.86; Rent,
      8; Cong. Ch., 5                                        166.86
    McIntosh. Dorchester Academy, Tuition                     32.45
    Marietta. First. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                10.60
    Savannah. Beach Inst., 145.35; Rent, 10; Cong.
      Ch. 20                                                 175.35
    Savannah. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             20.00


  ALABAMA, $37.40.

    Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
    Selma. Cong. Ch.                                          18.20
    Selma. Tuition                                             9.50


  MISSISSIPPI, $183.00.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition                           183.00


  LOUISIANA, $125.00.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                        125.00


  TEXAS, $281.50.

    Austin. Tillotson C. & N. Inst., Tuition                 281.50


  INCOMES, $60.00.

    Gen. C. B. Fisk Fund, _for Fisk U._                       30.00
    Belden Scholarship Fund, _for Talladega C._               30.00


  CANADA, $1.00.

    Caledonia. A. C. B.                                        1.00


  ENGLAND, $53.50.

    London, Stratford. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._, £10                              48.50
    York. Mrs. L. H. R. Clark, _for Cottage,
      Atlanta U._                                              5.00
                                                          ---------
          Total                                          $11,187.91
    Total from Oct. 1 to Feb 28                           96,743.02
                                                         ==========


  FOR AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions                                           $105.73
    Previously acknowledged                                  336.86
                                                             ------
          Total                                             $442.59

                                         H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.
                                                 56 Reade St., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As
closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted
CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its
humane and Christian policy toward the INDIANS.


STATISTICS FOR 1882.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In District of Columbia, 1; Virginia, 1;
North Carolina, 9; South Carolina, 2; Georgia, 14; Kentucky, 7;
Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 14; Kansas, 2; Arkansas, 1; Louisiana, 17;
Mississippi, 5; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 3. _Among the Indians_, 2.
Total, 88.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans,
La., and Austin, Tex.—8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: Wilmington,
N.C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S.C.; Savannah, Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn.—11. _Other
Schools_, 38. Total, 57.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 336;
among the Chinese, 31; among the Indians, 6; in Africa, 16. Total,
389. STUDENTS.—In theology, 72; law, 38; in college course, 104;
in other studies, 9,404. Total, 9,608. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. Indians under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as minsters here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.


                 *       *       *       *       *




                          [Illustration]

                            HORSFORD’S

                          ACID PHOSPHATE.

                             (LIQUID.)

                FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
                     EXHAUSTION, NERVOUSNESS,
                   DIMINISHED VITALITY, URINARY
                        DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

              PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF

             Prof. E. N. Horsford, of Cambridge, Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical
authority of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has
ever been offered to the public which seems to so happily meet the
general want as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free
on application.

                        MANUFACTURED BY THE

                      RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,

                         Providence, R.I.,

                  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

                          THE ESTEY ORGAN

will deserve the reputation of former years by the continued
addition of all the embellishments and improvements that costly and
skilled artisans can produce.

Illustrated Catalogues, with elegant and varied styles, sent free
to all applicants.

                 J. ESTEY & CO., Brattleboro, Vt.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       COMFORT FOR THE SICK.

                            QUITE NEW.

THE SCRIPTURE AND SONG COMFORTER.—A new selection of verses and
hymns for each day in the month. This selection of words of warning
and supplication and precept and promise will be a very desirable
companion. Large folio sheets, with text in large type, bound in
book form to hang upon the wall, and so arranged as to be changed
every day in the month. Price, 75 cents.


                THE OTHER “SILENT COMFORTERS” ARE:

THE SILENT COMFORTER NO. 1.—For every household, for tents,
hospitals or the sick-chamber, school-room, etc. Large folio
sheets, which are arranged as in the Scripture and Song Comforter.
Price, 75 cents.

THE SILENT COMFORTER NO. 2; or The Green Pastures.—Being select
verses containing prophecy and promise and solace and comfort.
Price, 75 cents.

THE SILENT COMFORTER NO. 3—From the Psalms.—Prepared in a similar
manner to the above, but with texts taken solely from the Psalms.
Price, 75 cents.

These Comforters relieve the anxious in their distress, and cheer
those that are drooping and bowed down. To all they are the sweet
messengers of peace and hope.

THE AMERICAN SUNDAY-SCHOOL UNION, 1,122 Chestnut Street,
Philadelphia.

10 Bible House, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                   A Portable Electric Lighter.

         (_Scientific American, New York, Dec. 16, 1882._)

A Portable Electric Lighter for $5 is being extensively sold by the
Portable Electric Light Co., of 22 Water street, Boston. It is an
economical and safe apparatus for lighting for home and business
purposes.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             EUROPE!!!

=Cook’s Grand Excursions= leave New York April 26th, June 1st,
June 13th and June 30th, 1883. =Passage Tickets= by all =Atlantic
Steamers=. Special facilities for securing =good berths=. =Tourist
Tickets= for individual travelers in =Europe=, by all routes, at
reduced rates.

=Cook’s Excursionist=, with Maps and full particulars, by mail 10
cents. Address

               THOS. COOK & SON, 261 Broadway, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        PEARLS IN THE MOUTH

[Illustration]

                       Beauty and Fragrance

                 Are communicated to the mouth by

                             SOZODONT

which renders the _teeth pearly white_, the gums rosy, and the
_breath sweet_. By those who have used it, it is regarded as an
indispensable adjunct of the toilet. It thoroughly _removes tartar_
from the teeth, without injuring the enamel.

                         SOLD BY DRUGGISTS

                            EVERYWHERE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

                            MANUAL OF
                           NEEDLEWORK,
                      Embroidery, Knitting,
                           CROCHETING,
                         LACE MAKING, &c.

This is a book of over 100 Pages, giving plain and intelligent
directions for doing all kinds of plain and fancy needlework
including the various kinds of artistic Embroidery, Knitting,
Netting, Tattin, Crocheting, Lace Making, Darned Net Work, &c. It
is profusely illustrated with cuts and diagrams showing how the
various stitches are made and is so plain and practical that it
cannot fail to assist ladies in their ordinary sewing, and will
also enable them to do the most =Artistic Embroidery= and to make
many articles for home and personal adornment for themselves and
friends.

=South Kensington, Arasene= and other =new kinds of Needlework=
are fully illustrated and explained, and directions given for
making many Fancy articles including Table and Chair Scarfs, Piano
Covers, Mantle and Window Lambrequins, Draperies, &c. Directions
are also given for Knitting and Crocheting many useful and fancy
articles. The chapter on Lace Making will enable many ladies to
make such desirable articles in Honiton and Point Lace as Collars,
Collaretts, Tie Ends, Jabots Edgings, Handkerchief Borders,
Corners, &c., that will rival in beauty the most expensive lace.
Macrame Lace is also illustrated and explained as well as Darned
net, Outline work, Rug Making &c. We send this book post-paid for
35 Cents; Four for =$1.00=. Get three of your friends to send with
you and obtain =Your Own Book Free=.


              BOOK OF 100 CHOICE EMBROIDERY DESIGNS,

For Borders, Corners, Centers &c., for Tidies, Rugs, Mats, Table
Covers, Lambrequins, Slippers, D’Oylies, &c., post-paid 25 cents;
Four for 75 Cents. The above two books for 50 Cts.

            PATTEN PUBLISHING CO., =47= Barclay Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    7 PER CENT. TO 8 PER CENT.

                     Interest Net to Investors

                      In First Mortgage Bonds

                         ON IMPROVED FARMS

                  In Iowa, Minnesota and Dakota.

                            SECURED BY

                        ORMSBY BROS. & CO.,

                  BANKERS, LOAN AND LAND BROKERS,

                         EMMETSBURG, IOWA.

        References and Circulars forwarded on Application.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                  Frank Leslie’s Sunday Magazine.

                    T. DE WITT TALMAGE, Editor.

                       SPECIAL ANNOUNCEMENT.

With 1883 the SUNDAY MAGAZINE entered on a new series, with
the distinctive purpose of providing such a variety of reading
matter of the highest literary merit (entertaining, chaste and
instructive) as shall commend it to Christian parents and those
engaged in the instruction of the young. Its purpose is to provide
the healthiest, yet most sparkling literature, for young and old.
DR. TALMAGE is the real editor, and intends to put his best work
into it. Writers of the greatest acknowledged excellence contribute
to its pages, and THE ILLUSTRATIONS are of a higher grade than any
that have hitherto appeared in the Magazine.

Among other unique attractions are the following twelve questions
answered by leaders of each denomination:

    WHAT IS METHODISM?
    WHAT IS MORAVIANISM?
    WHAT IS LUTHERANISM?
    WHAT IS EPISCOPALIANISM?
    WHAT IS PRESBYTERIANISM?
    WHAT IS SWEDENBORGIANISM?
    WHAT IS CONGREGATIONALISM?
    WHAT IS ROMAN CATHOLICISM?
    WHAT IS THE BAPTIST CHURCH?
    WHAT IS THE CHURCH OF THE DISCIPLES?
    WHAT IS THE DUTCH REFORMED CHURCH?
    WHAT IS THE REFORMED EPISCOPAL CHURCH?

Rev. Moses D. Hoge, D.D., Richmond, Va.; Rev. Charles H. Hall,
D.D., Brooklyn, N.Y.; Rev. Chauncey Giles, D.D., Philadelphia,
Pa.; Rev. Isaac Errett, D.D., Cincinnati. O.; Rev. Daniel Curry,
D.D., N.Y.; Rev. Edwin F. Hatfield, D.D., N.Y.; Rev. F. C. Ewer,
D.D., N.Y.; Bishop Charles B. Cheney, Chicago, Ill., and others,
will answer the above questions.

SUNDAY MAGAZINE is $3 per year. Postage Free; 4 Copies, $9; 6
Copies, $12.

Liberal terms to agents! Specimen Copy to any address for 10 cents.
Remit by Money Order or Registered Letter to

                 FRANK LESLIE’S SUNDAY MAGAZINE,
                    53, 55, 57 Park Place, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,

                  FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.

          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.

                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”

                           INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many Fancy
Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

[Illustration:

  SMITH
  AMERICAN
  ORGANS]

                           ARE THE BEST.

                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at

    BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
    LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
    KANSAS CITY, Mo., 817 Main Street;
    ATLANTA, GA., 27 Whitehall Street;
    Or, DEFIANCE, O.

                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: THE RISING SUN STOVE POLISH]

    For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil,
    For freeness from dust and slowness to soil,
    And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed,
    And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

    Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
    The half risen sun every package should bear;
    For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use,
    And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    CHEAPEST BOOK IN THE WORLD.

[Illustration]

The New American Dictionary, Price Only $1.00, CONTAINS 1,000
ENGRAVINGS AND 100 PAGES MORE THAN ANY OTHER BOOK OF THE KIND
EVER PUBLISHED. This useful and elegant volume is a Library and
Encyclopedia of general knowledge, as well as the best Dictionary
in the world. Superbly bound in cloth and gilt. No pocket affair,
but a large volume. It contains every useful word in the English
language, with its true meaning, derivation, spelling and
pronunciation and a vast amount of absolutely necessary information
upon Science, Mythology, Biography, American History, Insolvent,
Land and Interest laws, etc., being a =Perfect Library of
Reference=. Webster’s Dictionary costs $9.00, and the New American
Dictionary costs only $1.00.

                     Read what the Press Says:

“We have examined the New American Dictionary, and find it is a
very valuable book.”—HOUSE & HOME. “We have never seen its equal,
either in price, finish or contents.”—THE ADVOCATE. “Worth ten
times the money.”—TRIBUNE & FARMER. “A perfect Dictionary and
library of reference.”—LESLIE ILLUSTRATED NEWS. “We have frequent
occasion to use the New American Dictionary in our office, and
regard it well worth the price.”—CHRISTIAN UNION. “With the New
American Dictionary in the library for reference, many other
much more expensive works can be dispensed with, and ignorance
of his country, history, business, law, etc., is inexcusable
in any man.”—SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. “A valuable addition to any
library.”—N.Y. SUN. “There is more real worth than in most books
at ten times the cost.”—N.Y. COMMERCIAL WORLD. Note the price,
=$1.00=, post-paid; =2= copies for =$1.75=.

=Extraordinary Offer.= If any person will get up a Club of Ten, at
=$1.00= each, we will send Free as a premium the American Waterbury
Stem Winding Watch. For a =Club of 15= we will send free a Solid
Silver Hunting Case Watch. For a =Club of 30= we will send free a
Lady’s Solid Gold Hunting Case Watch. For a =Club of 50= we will
send free a Gent.’s Solid Gold Hunting Case Watch. Send a Dollar
at once for a sample copy. You can easily secure one of these
watches in a day or two, or during your leisure evenings. As to our
reliability, we can refer to the commercial agencies or any express
company in this city. Address

       WORLD MANUFACTURING CO., 132 Nassau Street, New York.


[Illustration]

                           THIS SPLENDID

                    _COIN SILVER HUNTING CASE_

                            WATCH FREE

            To any person who will send us an order for

                   15 NEW AMERICAN DICTIONARIES

                        At One Dollar Each.

Any person can readily secure Fifteen subscribers in one or two
hours, or in a single evening. If you want a good SOLID COIN SILVER
WATCH, and want to get it WITHOUT MONEY, you can easily do so. Send
ONE DOLLAR for a sample copy of the NEW AMERICAN DICTIONARY, and
see how easily you can get up a club Of FIFTEEN.

If you don’t care to get up a club yourself, will you kindly hand
this to some person whom you think would like to get the watch. 48
page illustrated catalogue FREE. Send money by registered letter or
P. O. Money Order. Send all orders to

       WORLD MANUFACTURING CO., 122 Nassau Street, New York.


  WORLD MANUFACTURING CO.:                       NOV. 21, 1882.

Find inclosed $30 for 30 New American Dictionaries and the Ladies’
Solid Gold Watch. I secured Thirty Subscribers in one day, and have
several more promised. Every one likes the Dictionary, and all I
have seen have subscribed.

                                  MISS LAURA COIL, Annapolis, Mo.


  OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR OF THE TREASURY, POST-OFFICE DEPARTMENT,
                             WASHINGTON, D.C., Jan. 29, 1883.

  WORLD MANUFACTURING CO.:

The New American Dictionary ordered Jan. 15 at hand. I obtained
fourteen subscribers in about as many minutes last Saturday, and
find the Post Office Department is a good field to work in. The
book proves to be just the thing for office use. I have many more
promised, and will send another larger order. Send the Silver Watch
as premium for this club. Respectfully,

                                                 ROBERT H. WOOD.

_Hundreds of Testimonials like the above._


                 *       *       *       *       *


[ILLUSTRATION:

MASON $ HAMLIN BEST ORGANS HIGHEST HONORS AT ALL
GREAT WORLD’S EXPOSITIONS

MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN & PIANO CO

BOSTON 154 TREMONT ST. NEW YORK E 14TH ST. CHICAGO, 149 WABASH
AVE.]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        WITHOUT A PARALLEL

                        IN MEDICAL HISTORY.

The remarkable results which have attended the administration
of Compound Oxygen, the new remedy for chronic and so-called
“incurable diseases,” _are without a parallel in medical history_.

As dispensers of this new remedy, we have, after over twelve years
of earnest, untiring and costly effort to introduce it to those who
need its vitalizing and health-restoring influences, succeeded in
resting its claims on the basis of facts and results of so wide and
universal a character—_facts and results on record and open to the
closest investigations_—that no room for a question remains as to
its _marvelous action in restoring the diseased to health_.

The rapidly-increasing number of those who have obtained relief
from pain or been restored to health by Compound Oxygen, reaching
now to many thousands, scattered throughout the whole country, is
having a wide influence on public sentiment. There are no arguments
so convincing as well-known facts. If a man or a woman who has been
suffering for years from an exhausting disease, which no physician
had been able to cure, tries a newly-discovered remedy and is
brought back to health, the fact stands as an unanswerable argument
in favor of that remedy, so far, at least, as this particular case
is concerned. A resort to the same remedy in another case, regarded
as incurable, and with a like result, adds a new and stronger
argument in its favor. Accumulate similar results to the number
of hundreds and thousands, and in the widest range of chronic and
“desperate” diseases and abandoned cases, and you have a weight
of evidence that is irresistible. On this weight of indisputable
evidence we rest the claims of Compound Oxygen.

It is frequently urged against this treatment by persons who have
not made themselves acquainted with the natural laws governing its
action, that the same agent is administered for all diseases—for
neuralgia or catarrh; for rheumatism or consumption; for heart
disease or bronchitis; that we offer it as a universal specific. In
our _Treatise on Compound Oxygen_, which will be _mailed free_ to
any one who will write to us for it, we have fully explained the
nature and action of this remedy, and shown that it is not specific
to any disease or class of diseases; but that it acts directly upon
the nervous system and vital organs, and thence universally in
the whole body. It gives new force and a more vigorous action to
all the life-centres, thus restoring to nature the dominant power
and healthy action which had been lost. This being the case, no
matter what the disease, or where located, it must be gradually
ameliorated, and, if the central healthy action can be maintained,
finally cured. Every intelligent and unprejudiced person will at
once see that if the law of action which we claim for Compound
Oxygen be the true one, its operation must be universal, and not
local or specific; and that all forms of disease may be reached
by this agent. And the fact that they are reached, and in so
large a number of cases relieved, verifies the theory of cure and
substantiates the claims which are made for this new substance as
_being the most remarkable in its action of any therapeutic agent
yet discovered_.

If we contrast the violence which is so often done to the delicate
organisms of the human body through the administration of drugs,
given to break the force of a disease, and which sometimes
keep the patient lingering for months in slow convalescence,
needing all the while the physician’s care, with the revitalized
condition of compound oxygen patients, the advantage on the side
of the latter, as compared with those treated under most of the
prevailing systems, becomes strikingly apparent. Under the new
treatment, which is by inhalation, there is no weakening of the
tone of the stomach by drugs, and no violent assaults upon any
nerve or fibre in the body, _but a gentle and subtly penetrating
influence, reaching to the very centre of all the life forces, and
restoring them to a healthier action_. The natural result under
this treatment must be that, when a patient recovers he is in a
far better condition to resist the causes which produce disease
than the patient who has had the life forces weakened through drug
medication.

_As a restorer of vital force_, it can be largely shown from the
results obtained during the past twelve years, that _Compound
Oxygen is the most efficient agent yet discovered by the medical
profession. Its use by over-worked business and professional men,
and by all who suffer from nervous exhaustion and low vitality,
would save many hundreds of lives every year and give to thousands
more the ability to work without the weariness, exhaustion and
peril which now attend their labors._

Our large correspondence with patients and health-seekers,
throughout this and other countries, gives evidence of the
increasing confidence which is steadily growing in the public
mind favorable to the Oxygen cure. The living witnesses to its
remarkable efficacy, and the warm advocates of its dispensation
are, as we have said, rapidly increasing. By personal influence
and correspondence, those who have been relieved from distressing
complaints, or cured of diseases which were steadily growing worse
for years, are sending the good news of their recovery to friends
and neighbors, near and remote. Many of these order the Treatment,
and if helped or cured, as rarely fails to be the case, become in
turn the friends and advocates of this new method of cure. So the
knowledge is spreading, and the use of Compound Oxygen growing,
with a rapidity of which few outside of our establishment have any
comprehension.

To those who wish to inform themselves in regard to this new
Treatment, we will send, _free of cost_, our “_Treatise on Compound
Oxygen_,” and our pamphlet, containing over fifty “_Unsolicited
Testimonials_;” also “_Health and Life_,” our Quarterly Record of
Cases and Cures, under the Compound Oxygen Treatment, in which
will be found, as reported by patients themselves, _and open for
verification, more remarkable results in a single period of three
months than all the medical journals in the United States can show
in a year_!

DEPOSITORY ON PACIFIC COAST.—H. E. MATHEWS, 606 Montgomery Street,
San Francisco, California, will fill orders for the Compound Oxygen
Treatment on Pacific Coast.


                      DRS. STARKEY, & PALEN,

  G. R. STARKEY, A.M., M.D.
  G. E. PALEN, Ph.B., M.D.
  1109 and 1111 Girard St. [Betw’n Chestnut and Market.], Phila., Pa.


                 *       *       *       *       *


            CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS’ NEW PUBLICATIONS.


                          ON THE DESERT.

  With a Brief Review of Recent Events in Egypt. By Rev. HENRY
  M. FIELD, D.D., author of “From the Lakes of Killarney to the
  Golden Horn,” and “From Egypt to Japan.” 1 vol. crown 8vo, with
  a map, $2.

                _From Rev. William M. Taylor, D.D._

I was so interested in its perusal that it was with difficulty that
I could persuade myself to lay it down. I find it more interesting
than a novel, and full, besides, of valuable information, sound
reflection and clear thinking. The descriptions enable one to see
for himself the objects on which the writer looked. Nor must I
forget to add that every now and then a delightful humor bubbles
up in these pages, which adds immensely to the charm of a very
charming book.


               NEWMAN SMYTH’S REPLY TO JOSEPH COOK.

                    DORNER ON THE FUTURE STATE.

  Being a Translation of the Section of his System of Christian
  Doctrine, comprising the Doctrine of the Last Things. With an
  introduction and notes. By NEWMAN SMYTH, D.D., author of “Old
  Faiths in New Light,” “The Orthodox Theology of To-day,” etc. 1
  vol. 12mo, $1.

“The present book contains most of the distinctive views by which
Dorner is best known. It is an attempt in plain words to bring
the doctrine of Christian eschatology into harmony with the best
knowledge and the best thought of the age.”


RECOLLECTIONS OF ARTHUR PENRHYN STANLEY, late Dean of Westminster.

  By GEORGE GRANVILLE BRADLEY, D.D., Dean of Westminster,
  Honorary Fellow of University College, Oxford. 1 vol. 12mo, $1.

“It is an affectionate and graceful biographical memorial of a man
whose scholarship and intellectual force were partly concealed
by the fineness of his nature, the sweetness and delicacy of his
spirit and modest beauty of his bearing. The story of his life has
been fittingly told, and will be gratefully read by his numerous
American admirers.”—_Christian at Work._


                        MORAVIAN MISSIONS.

  By Rev. A. C. THOMPSON, D.D. 1 vol. 12mo, $2.

“One striking peculiarity of these lectures is that they condense
into the smallest compass a vast amount of intricate matters and
widely scattered particulars, gathered from sources out of the way
of ordinary students and unknown to ordinary readers, and present
this great variety of facts of geography, history, ethnology and
biography in such a way that there is not only no confusion or
heaviness, but a certain brightness and vivacity which makes the
narrative fairly fascinating.”


                CRITERIA OF DIVERSE KINDS OF TRUTH.

  As opposed to Agnosticism. Being a Treatise on Applied Logic.
  (Philosophic Series No. 1.) Energy, Efficient and Final Cause.
  (Philosophic Series No. 2.) By JAMES MCCOSH, D.D. LL.D.,
  D.L. Author of “Intuitions of the Mind,” “Laws of Discursive
  Thought,” etc. Each 1 vol., paper, 50 cents.

“It is not unlikely to prove true in the end that the most useful
popular service which Dr. McCosh has rendered to the cause of
right thinking and to a sound philosophy of life is his proposed
_Philosophic Series_, the first number of which, _Criteria of
Diverse Kinds of Truth as Opposed to Agnosticism_, we have perused
with great satisfaction.”—_The Independent._


                           FINAL CAUSES.

  By PAUL JANET, Member of the French Academy. Translated from
  the Second French Edition. With a Preface by Robert Flint,
  D.D., LL.D. 1 vol. 8vo, $2.50.

“No book of greater importance in the realm of theological
philosophy has appeared during the past twenty years than Paul
Janet’s ‘Final Causes.’ The central idea of the work is one which
the whole course of scientific discussion has made the burning
question of the day, viz.: that final causes are not inconsistent
with physical causation.”—_Independent._


                    THE BEGINNINGS OF HISTORY,

  According to the Bible and the Traditions of Oriental Peoples.
  From the Creation of Man to the Deluge. By FRANÇOIS LENORMANT,
  Professor of Archæology at the National Library of France,
  etc., etc. (Translated from the Second French Edition.) With an
  introduction by FRANCIS BROWN, Assistant Professor in Biblical
  Philology, Union Theological Seminary. 1 vol. 12mo, 750 pp.,
  $2.50.

“The work is one that deserves to be studied by all students of
ancient history, and in particular by ministers of the gospel,
whose office requires them to interpret the Scriptures, and who
ought not to be ignorant of the latest and most interesting
contribution of science to the elucidation to the sacred
volume.”—_New York Tribune._


                THE RELIGIONS OF THE ANCIENT WORLD,

  Including Egypt, Assyria and Babylonia, Persia, India,
  Phœnicia, Etruria, Greece, Rome. By GEORGE RAWLINSON, M.A.,
  author of “The Origin of Nations,” etc. 1 vol., 12mo, $1.

“The historical studies which have elevated this author’s works
to the highest position have made him familiar with those beliefs
which once directed the world’s thought; and he has done literature
no better service than in this little volume.... The book is, then,
to be accepted as a sketch, and as the most trustworthy sketch
in our language, of the religions discussed.”—_N.Y. Christian
Advocate._


                      SCIENCE AND SENTIMENT.

  Essays, chiefly Philosophical. By NOAH PORTER, D.D., LL.D. 1
  vol., crown 8vo., $2.50

“President Porter is at his best in some of these papers. An
incisive wit runs through them, and all are marked by that power of
clear definition and of vigorous statement coupled with fairness
and frankness in treating the arguments of opponents so apparent in
all his writings.”—_Zion’s Herald._


                          LOGIC AND LIFE.

  With other Sermons. By Rev. H. S. HOLLAND, M.A., Senior Student
  of Christ Church, Oxford. With an Introductory Notice by
  PRESIDENT NOAH PORTER. 1 vol. 8vo, $1.50.

“They are in the truest sense scholarly ... yet there is about
them, as Dr. Porter expresses it, very little of the stiffness, the
formality or the remoteness from human sympathies and associations
which often, not to say usually, characterize ‘University Sermons.’
Ministers will find them a rare and valuable addition to the
library.”—_The Examiner._


                     TURKISH LIFE IN WAR TIME.

  By HENRY O. DWIGHT. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.50.

“This book is the most vivid and faithful sketch of Turkish
character that we have ever seen.... It is mainly a series of
interesting notes and sketches, giving those little details of life
and thought from day to day, in a time of great excitement, which
are so essential in order to gain an accurate knowledge of any
people.”—_The Nation._


[Illustration: stars]

_These books are for sale by all Booksellers, or will be
sent, post-paid, on receipt of the price, by_


                     CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS,

                                 743 and 745 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


        ATKIN & PROUT, Printers, 12 Barclay St., New York.




Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions silently
corrected. Inconsistent hyphenation retained due to the
multiplicity of authors. Arithmetic errors in the receipts have
been retained as printed.

Images have been moved outside of paragraphs, resulting in page
numbers that are slightly off.

Missing “t” added in “therefore” on page 106 (therefore an
immediately pressing necessity).

Removed extra “s” introduced in line-break hyphenation on page 107
(no doubt that their presence).

Changed “Fragance” to “Fragrance” on page 125 (Beauty and Fragrance).

Inserted missing “n” in “governing” on inside back cover (natural
laws governing its action).

Duplicate “them” removed from the inside back cover (restoring
them to a healthier action).








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 37, NO. 4, APRIL, 1883 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.