[Illustration: JUNE, 1883.

VOL. XXXVII.

NO. 6.

The American Missionary]




CONTENTS


                                                         PAGE.


  EDITORIAL.

    BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK                                 161
    HON. J. J. H. GREGORY—JOHN F. SLATER EDUCATIONAL
      FUND                                                 164
    OUR FINANCES—PARAGRAPHS                                165
    PARAGRAPHS—VALUABLE BOOK ON INDIAN MISSIONS            166
    BENEFACTIONS                                           167
    GENERAL NOTES                                          168


  THE SOUTH.

    A REMARKABLE TRIBUTE                                   171
    REVIVAL WORK AT FISK UNIVERSITY—EMERSON INSTITUTE      172
    EMERSON INSTITUTE, MOBILE, ALA. (cut)                  173
    INDUSTRIAL WORK AT ATLANTA UNIVERSITY                  174
    AFRICA AT ATLANTA—ONE DAY                              175
    A JUBILATE                                             176
    GREEN COVE SPRINGS (cut). COLOR LINE IN FLORIDA        177
    WOMAN’S MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION                         178
    NOTES FROM THE FIELD                                   179


  THE CHINESE.

    THE NEW MISSION IN SOUTH CHINA                         180


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    THE COMING OF THE ORGAN                                181
    MOUNTAIN FAMILY SINGING PSALMS                         182


  RECEIPTS                                                 183

  COPY AND MAIL                                            188

  PROPOSED CONSTITUTION                                    189

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK.
         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,
                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.
         Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as
                       second-class matter.




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


PRESIDENT.

  HON. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


TREASURER.

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


AUDITORS.

  M. F. READING.
  WM. A. NASH.


EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman; A. P. FOSTER, Secretary; LYMAN
ABBOTT, ALONZO S. BALL, A. S. BARNES, C. T. CHRISTENSEN, FRANKLIN
FAIRBANKS, CLINTON B. FISK, S. B. HALLIDAY, SAMUEL HOLMES, CHARLES
A. HULL, SAMUEL S. MARPLES, CHARLES L. MEAD, WM. H. WARD, A. L.
WILLISTON.


DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

  Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
  Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
  Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields,
to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: Estey

Organ

The excellences of the ESTEY ORGAN may not be told in an ordinary
advertisement. Our Illustrated Catalogue, sent free, containing
engravings from photographs of elegant styles, with full
description, is more satisfactory

J: ESTEY & Co BRATTLEBORO VT.]

                 *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

             VOL. XXXVII.      JUNE, 1883.      NO. 6.

                 *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

APPOINTMENT OF SECRETARY.

It gives us pleasure to announce that in following out the
arrangements fore-shadowed in the May “Missionary,” the Executive
Committee of the A. M. A. has made choice of Miss D. E. Emerson as
Secretary of its Bureau of Woman’s Work. Miss Emerson is well known
in the mission fields of the Association, having been a teacher, a
lady missionary and also at the New York Office doing service in
connection with the correspondence for the Southern work. In the
latter position, covering a period of several years, she has had
occasion to visit localities occupied by our lady missionaries, and
in these and many other ways has gained a very extensive knowledge
of the wants and the methods of help needful for the elevation of
the colored people. Her ability for her new position has already
been tested, and the Association has great confidence in her
capacity to meet the requirements of all interested in the great
work that lies before her. Correspondence relating to the Bureau
should be addressed to Miss D. E. Emerson, at the office of the A.
M. A., 56 Reade St., New York.


METHODS OF WORK.

Our Bureau inaugurates no new woman’s missionary society. It is
simply a plan for giving more efficiency to the work already in
hand. We leave the mode of co-operation on the part of the ladies
of the North entirely to themselves, and we can think of no better
plan for such co-operation than that given on the next page in the
letter of Miss M. E. Smith of Gorham, Me., which describes the
methods in use the past year in that State.

Neither are the means for promoting the objects of our Bureau new;
they are based on twenty years’ experience and extend to all the
branches of home, school and church life. We can aid directly in
the elevation of women and children through the varied work of
the ladies engaged in our different mission fields. Our method of
giving information to the Christian women of the North will be not
only by correspondence through the Secretary of the Bureau, but
also by direct information from the lady missionaries and teachers,
who will attend the meetings of ladies at the conferences,
associations, and, as far as practicable, local societies in
connection with the churches.


METHOD OF CO-OPERATION.

FROM MISS MARY E. SMITH, MAINE.

In answer to your inquiry as to the mode of collecting, I would say
that we have _no_ organization. The ladies talked the matter over
and decided that as there are so many organizations already as to
be almost bewildering, we would carry on this work with as little
“red tape” as possible. At each annual conference a meeting of all
ladies interested is held, a report read of the amount collected
the past year and a committee of three chosen to carry on the work
for the following year. This committee appoints a collector for
each conference, and each conference collector engages a collector
in each church in her conference. The collectors of the several
churches report progress and send money obtained to the conference
collector, and she forwards it to the chairman of the State
Committee, who keeps the bank account and forwards the money in due
time to the A. M. A.

By so simple an arrangement we also save in expense. With the
exception of a very slight amount for printing of circulars for
distribution through the States, the only expense is that of
postage, etc., which being divided among so many is borne by the
several collectors and does not take from the sum collected. So
far the working of our plan has been, I think, as successful as we
could reasonably expect.


LETTERS OF SYMPATHY.

FROM MRS. HENRY L. CHASE, IOWA.

It is with great satisfaction that I learn that a “Bureau of
Woman’s Work” has been organized in connection with the A. M. A. It
seems to me that such an organization is not merely a valuable help
but a manifest necessity in the effective prosecution of “Woman’s
Work for Woman” in the South—a work which lies upon the hearts of
very many of the Christian women of the North and which ought to
lie upon the consciences of all.

A very limited experience teaches that in every kind of benevolent
work _information_ is the root from which interest and action
grow. Probably in no other way can the facts which will quicken
the interest of the ladies of our churches in work among the
Freedpeople be so thoroughly and influentially presented as by
means of this Bureau. Specific objects of effort, concerning
which details may be furnished, will often win the practical
attention of those who are comparatively indifferent to the idea
of general needs. And the sanction of the A. M. A. being implied
in any appeals made thorough the Bureau for definite objects, will
give assurance that our gifts and our labors are to be applied
in the wisest way and where the need is most urgent. But perhaps
nothing accomplished by this organization will be more gratefully
appreciated or more productive of the desired results than the
visits of missionaries to the churches which support them, and
their statements by word of mouth in regard to the appalling needs
and encouraging successes in their various fields. This new branch
of work has my warmest good wishes and my earnest prayers for its
fullest success.


BRIEF RESPONSES.

Miss A. W. Johnson of North Brookfield, Mass., writes: I am very
glad that a “Bureau of Woman’s Work” has been organized, and
believe it will open up new avenues for work among our ladies. I
respond at once, hoping I can do something to interest them in this
direction.

Rev. S. E. Lathrop of Macon, Ga., writes: I rejoice in the new
“Bureau of Woman’s Work.” It is a necessary and hopeful acquisition.


BUREAU REPRESENTED IN OHIO.

AT the Ohio State Association which convened at Akron, May 8,
Dist. Sec. Pike in his address set forth the plans of our Bureau
of Woman’s Work, referring especially to the methods proposed for
bringing the condition of the colored people more fully before the
Christian women of the North. He was accompanied by Miss Rose M.
Kinney, who had just returned from her field of labor at McIntosh,
Liberty County, Ga., and who, in behalf of our Bureau of Woman’s
Work, gave an interesting account of her mission services, which
had included that of organizing a Woman’s Missionary Society among
the colored women. Miss Kinney also addressed the Woman’s meeting
held during the sessions of the Association. Arrangements have
been made, as far as practicable, with other States for a like
presentation of the varied work carried on by this Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the next and future numbers of the MISSIONARY, the details of
the “Bureau of Woman’s Work” will appear in a separate department
under the above heading.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LORD’S BLESSED ONES.—A recent visitor to the Teachers’ Home,
Storrs School, Atlanta, writes that on his arrival, about nine in
the evening, he was met by the lady teachers, who were returning,
two by two, from attending cottage prayer meetings in the parish,
of which there had been six that night. “Coming in,” he says,
“from such work in the lowly homes of a despised people, cheerful
and delighted with the meetings, they made a profound impression
upon me as the Lord’s blessed ones. If He hasn’t got any mansions
up there quite worthy of them He’ll go to work and fix up some
especially for their use.”

THE readers of the MISSIONARY are not ignorant of the benefactions
of Mr. J. J. H. Gregory, of Marblehead, Mass., to this Association.
The following extract from a Wilmington paper indicates the
appreciation in which he is held not only by the colored people,
but also by leading citizens South.

“The reception of Mr. Gregory took place in the Mayor’s office in
the City Hall yesterday at noon. There was quite a large attendance
of our prominent citizens, including a few colored men, all of
whom gave evidence of the esteem entertained for the distinguished
visitor and their pleasure at the opportunity thus afforded them
of forming the acquaintance of one who has devoted so much of
his fortune to the advancement of the educational facilities and
interests of Wilmington. Mr. Gregory was introduced to those
present by Mayor Hall in a few brief and appropriate remarks, which
were responded to by Mr. G. in fitting terms. Short speeches were
also delivered by Rev. Drs. Taylor and Wilson, in the order named,
and at the conclusion of their remarks, Mayor Hall again spoke,
and at more length. The meeting was a very pleasant one, and we
have reason to believe that Mr. Gregory was much pleased at the
heartiness of his reception.”

       *       *       *       *       *

THE Trustees of the John F. Slater Educational Fund met in New
York April 25 and 26. It was voted to appropriate $20,000 during
the coming year to such schools as are best fitted to help young
colored people to become useful to their race, preference being
given to those institutions which furnish industrial education.
Over seventy institutions have already reported to Rev. Dr. A. G.
Haygood, the Secretary. It is not conclusive from the reports that
have reached us that the sum named above is the entire amount that
will be applied the coming year for educational purposes, or that
the income of the fund will be principally used for industrial
education. We believe the plans of the Trustees are as broad as
the necessities of the colored people for education in every
department. The meeting of the Board was fully attended, and the
place made vacant by the death of Wm. E. Dodge was filled by the
election of his son. We commend the Trustees for their careful and
conscientious endeavors to provide for the uplifting of the colored
people and the welfare of the nation.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE average attendance at the 30 conventions of the Co-operative
Societies in Connecticut was 136. The number of churches
represented was 230, of the 297 in the State. The average
attendance of similar meetings in 1872 was 104. On the whole the
recent meetings were of marked interest, and of much encouragement
to the missionary work done by Congregationalists.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR FINANCES.—During the seven months of the fiscal year closing
April 30, our receipts from collections and donations have amounted
to $109,275.73. The collections and donations for the same months
last year were $138,094.35, a decrease of $28,818.62. The legacies
for these months last year were $23,447.81, while for this year
they have been $42,121.18, an increase of $18,673.37. The total
receipts thus far this year in collections, donations and legacies
have been $151,396.91 against $161,542.16 for the same period last
year, a decrease of $10,145.25. We earnestly urge the friends of
this Association to study these figures. Our last annual meeting,
in view of the pressing work before us, recommended the increase
of our receipts 25 per cent. for the present fiscal year. The
added expenses of our Indian work and the pressing calls for
enlargement of our school and church work South, make this increase
imperative—and especially as the openings before us in these lines
of effort are exceedingly auspicious and encouraging. If the
increase named is received, we can go forward; if not, we must
leave undone what ought to be done. Under these circumstances, we
ask individual donors whom God hath blessed with the means and the
heart to help, to give special attention to the facts we present,
and we also respectfully request pastors to bring before their
people our financial necessities, so that during the next five
months we may be able to go forward without debt or diminution of
work.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CHURCH BOOK, Hymns and Tunes, for the Uses of Christian
Worship, prepared by Leonard Woolsey Bacon. New York: D. Appleton
& Co. Several novelties are presented by this book. The more
prominent of these are (1) the typographical arrangement, which
allows the hymns to go in without the usual limitations of space,
(2) the number of hymns, which is less than half that usually found
in books of the kind, (3) a combination of the standard tunes
with the best of the English lyrical compositions. We believe
there is common sense in Dr. Bacon’s idea that the church will be
better served with a smaller number of the choicest hymns. As both
the standard and (so called) classical tunes are selected with
excellent judgment, we see no reason why the Church Book may not
prove a valuable addition to the hymn-and-tune-ology of the day.
The typography and binding of the book are of the best.

       *       *       *       *       *

GENERAL LITURGY AND BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER, prepared by Prof.
Hopkins, is the title of an attractive volume of 137 pages,
published by A. S. Barnes & Co. A feature of especial interest
is the “Table for Scripture Readings for Divine Service on every
Lord’s Day throughout the year,” embracing a period of two years.
The volume is tastefully prepared and printed in red and black,
thus assisting the eye in selecting the different parts of the
service. We believe it will be found helpful in the pulpit, in
families and in mission work at home and abroad.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE _Home Missionary_ for May appears with new cover and
an addition of eight pages, four of which are devoted to
advertisements. The reading matter, embraces a wide range of
discussion on the different interests of home missionary work, and
as usual was prepared especially for this excellent organ of the
Home Missionary Society. It gives evidence of an advance along the
line, and will be welcome in its approved appearance among its
numerous readers.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE _Church Building Quarterly_, No. 2, is out, and gives to its
readers a hundred pages of excellent reading relating to the
interests of the Congregational Union. Plans, specifications and
cuts of 26 varieties of church edifices are given with suggestions
as to cost, materials, conveniences, title to property and other
information of value. Cuts and specifications for three varieties
of parsonages are also given. The Quarterly is attractive and we
congratulate the brethren who manage the affairs of the Society on
their enterprise and success.

       *       *       *       *       *


A VALUABLE BOOK ON INDIAN MISSIONS.

INDIAN MISSIONS is a volume of 270 pages, published by the Am. S.
S. Union, from the pen of Rev. Myron Eells, missionary of the A.
M. A. among the Indians in Washington Territory. Mr. Eells is the
son of a missionary, who gave himself to the work on the Pacific
Coast in 1838. He grew up in that country, and is perhaps as well
qualified as any man living to write the history and results of the
work of different benevolent societies among the Indian tribes of
that section. In the book before us he gives in order the history
of the early missions of the Methodist Episcopal Church and those
of the American Board, making mention of the development of the
work in ten localities among as many different tribes. The progress
of civilizing agencies is recorded with a fidelity and minuteness
that adds much to the value of the volume. It appears that most of
the missionaries believed that the Bible and the plow should go
hand in hand, and that through their influence the Indians were
stimulated to cultivate lands, build houses, abandon polygamy,
become temperate, connect themselves with churches, and place
their children in schools. The author expresses the fear that his
statistics relating to such matters may be considered too large,
but affirms that they have been taken from official reports. He
comforts himself, also, in the words of another, to the effect
that “if one-fourth of all that is reported has been accomplished,
a great work has been done.”

Part II. of Mr. Eells’ book treats of the reflex influence of the
mission upon the whites. His claims are no less interesting than
surprising. He says: “Indian missions brought the first white
woman overland to Oregon, opened the first emigrant wagon road to
the Columbia River, furnished Oregon with the first United States
officer, gave the first governor to the Territory, established the
first permanent American settlement here, so that without this aid
the Provisional Government would, without doubt, never have been
organized, brought the first American cattle to the Willamette
Valley, and saved the country, or, at least, an important portion
of it, to the United States.”

Indeed, when he tells the story of Dr. Whitman’s winter journey
to Washington, pursuant to the vote of the missionaries, “to make
a desperate effort to save the country to the United States,”
he is not only graphic but eloquent. His description of the
hardships of the winter’s campaign and of the grand success of the
return journey with scores of emigrants, who illustrated beyond
question that women and wagons could cross the mountains, and that
missionaries at least had the enterprise needful to provide the
agency for establishing a provisional government at the focal point
in the history of our western territories, is full of interest.

It is impossible, however, in our limited space, even to allude to
all the topics touched upon. We must ask our readers to purchase
the volume. It is well suited for Sabbath-school libraries, and
will be welcomed by good men everywhere who love mission work. As
a testimony in behalf of the far-reaching influences of missionary
endeavors, it is of rare excellence. We hope its circulation will
be swift and extensive.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

Hon. Peter Cooper left by will $100,000 to the Cooper Institute,
New York.

Senator Joseph E. Brown, of Atlanta, has donated $50,000 in bonds
to the University of Georgia.

The late Jos. J. Cook, Esq., of Providence, left to Trinity College
$5,000 for the purchase of books.

Carleton College, Minn., has received a gift of $12,000 from Mr. E.
H. Williams, of Philadelphia.

Mrs. Jonathan Adams, of Concord, N.H., bequeathed $5,000 to
Holderness Academy as a scholarship fund.

Middlebury College, Vt., has come into possession of $1,500 by the
death of the widow of Rev. T. A. Merrill, D.D., by which it offers
three prizes to the sophomore class.

The will of the late Hon. J. N. Hungerford, of Corning, N.Y.
bequeaths $25,000 to Hamilton College, in addition to $15,000
given by him to that institution a year or more ago.

A gentleman in New York State has recently contributed $5,000 to
the Atlanta University to be used as a fund, the interest of which
can be applied for annual scholarships.

Mr. Moody’s Mount Hermon School for Boys is to receive the entire
cabinet of fossil footprints, shells and minerals belonging to the
late Roswell Field, of Gill, Mass., and also the sum of $1,600 to
provide for its preservation and enlargement.

The Vermont Academy at Saxton’s River, Vt., has just received a
gift of $12,000 from four prominent Vermonters—$3,000 each from
Lawrence Barnes, Julius J. Estey, Jacob Estey and Levi K. Fuller.

The widow of John Evans, of South Meriden, has given $2,000 to
Wesleyan University to found the John Evans scholarship, open to
candidates for the ministry in junior or senior classes.

_It has been estimated at Washington that the annual profit to the
country by the conversion of illiterate into educated labor cannot
be less than $400,000,000. If so, money given for the endowment of
educational institutions at the South, like those of the A. M. A.,
would yield a hundred fold in half a generation._

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


AFRICA.

—The caravan of English missionaries conducted by Mr. Stokes has
reached the extreme south of Victoria Nyanza, a little to the west
of Kaghei.

—Mr. Resteau has established at Ambrisette the first factory of the
Belgian Company for African commerce. He has sent the plans for
another establishment that the company will found in the region
south of the Congo.

—The Committee of English missions has accepted for its stations on
the Niger the services of Dr. Percy Brown, who offers himself for
work in any part of the mission field.

—The new king of Cayor has made a visit to the Governor of St.
Louis, promising to aid with all his power the construction of the
railroad. In two or three weeks the section from Dakar to Rufisque
will be finished.

—The British and African Steam Navigation Company, which has
already 20 ships for service on the west side of Africa, has
constructed two others of less draught that they may leap the sand
banks of the lower rivers. They will be named the Lagos and the
Calabar.

—Unwilling to yield to any one the territory of Liberia, the Senate
of Monrovia is prepared to place the question of the southern
limits of this State, a subject on which it disagrees with England,
to the arbitration of the United States.

—Mr. Piazzi Smythe has communicated to the English journal
_Nature_, from a correspondent at Santa Cruz, capital of Teneriffe,
that the peak of Teyde, which has not had an eruption since 1798,
has broken out again since the commencement of 1883. A river of
lava descends from its summit, still covered with snow.

—The Baptist missionaries settled at Manyanga and Stanley Pool,
where their stations have taken the names of Wathen and Arthington,
in honor of the two principal supporters of their work, have felt
more and more obliged to free themselves from the protection of the
armed Zanzibarites of the Belgian expeditions. Since the attack in
which M. Peschuel Locsche was wounded they have felt that the route
along the northern side of the river from Manyanga to Stanley Pool
was safe only for strong caravans well armed, and they have sought
one upon the southern side. There the Belgians, after having burned
Ngombi, whose chief was disposed to attack the caravans, have
made a new route to Stanley Pool, and Lieut. Valcke has founded a
station at Ngombi and organized a service of caravans between that
point and Stanley Pool. The missionaries have one independent of
the Belgians, so that caravans pass every four or five days. The
security of transport is greater, but the price of everything is
greatly increased.

—The combats between the people of Stanley and the natives have
arrested the advance of the missionaries of the Livingstone Inland
mission. After having gone 50 kilometres beyond their station,
they were obliged to found a new station upon the Loukounga in
the midst of a population always well disposed toward them. Also
the missionaries of this mission have decided not to establish
themselves at Stanley Pool, and have actually gone to work in
the region near their stations, 50 or 60 kilometres apart, over
an extent of 170 kilometres. During the five years in which they
have lived there they have never had a quarrel with the natives,
who respect them and confide their children to them. They have
learned the language of the country, prepared many pupils to become
teachers, and found the natives eager to furnish them the products
of the country and at their service for porters along the route
from one station to the other.


THE INDIANS.

—The last session of Congress appropriated $300,000 to the
Cherokees as payment for the lands now occupied by the Nez Perces,
Poncas, Pawnees and Otoes.

—The Indian Homestead Colony at Flandreau, D.T., reports that
ninety-four homesteads have been taken by the Indians to be held at
least five years by them.

—Four hundred thousand dollars have been appropriated by the
general government for the support of Indian day and industrial
schools and for other educational purposes.

—Capt. R. H. Pratt is to receive $68,500 for the support of the
Indian Industrial School at Carlisle, Pa. This amount is to cover
all expenditures for transportation of Indians, and for the salary
and support of teachers and students.

—A new Industrial School for Indian girls has been started by the
Government at West Branch, Iowa. Mr. Benjamin Miles is to have
charge of the enterprise. The school has capacity for fifty pupils,
and by the terms of the appropriation, none can be received who are
under fourteen years of age.


THE CHINESE.

—According to Missionary Butler, of China, as Buddhism has no
heaven for women, the Chinese damsels labor with might and main to
lay up merits that they may prevail with the judges of the lower
world to let them be born again as men, so that they may have a
chance to get there.

—More than 280 Christian women are banded together in England,
daily praying for blessing to rest upon the work among the poor,
degraded and down-trodden women of China. Three of the members of
this Woman’s Prayer Union for the Women of China have been accepted
by the China Inland Mission, and are hoping soon to leave for their
future sphere of work.

—A happy thought for a Christian wedding party found expression at
Norwich, England, on the occasion of the marriage of Rev. J. O.
Hoare, son of Canon Hoare and Principal of the C. M. S. College,
at Ningpo. After breakfast it was proposed to make a special
collection for the China mission, which resulted in subscriptions
amounting to about $2,200.

—The edict against Christianity in Japan has never been repealed.
At first, only teaching was permitted, and that was to be secular;
then preaching in private was tolerated; then followed assembles
for Christian worship, and the organization of Christian churches;
and in October, 1880, the natives held a meeting in the open air on
the grounds of a hotel in the public park at Uyeno; some four or
five thousand people were present, and the meeting lasted two days.
It was openly advertised in the native newspapers and publicly
announced by large post-bills which met the eye in all parts of the
city, and one of which was on the very spot where the old edict
board used to stand. And yet the government does not interfere.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SOUTH.

REV. JOSEPH E. ROY, D.D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT.

PROF. ALBERT SALISBURY, SUPERINTENDENT OF EDUCATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


A REMARKABLE TRIBUTE.

HOW IT PAYS TO EDUCATE COLORED MINISTERS.

REV. W. W. PATTON, D.D., WASHINGTON.

Facts are worth more than abstract theories. Let the people
have the facts. Howard University has for a number of years
been carrying on a theological department, which has educated
many colored ministers for all the evangelical denominations in
this country, besides sending several missionaries to Africa.
This department is mainly supported by the American Missionary
Association, and its principal professorship has been partially
endowed by Mrs. Stone. From this institution went forth a few years
since, a young man (Rev. A. J. Henry) of unmixed African blood,
who took as his field of labor a benighted county in Virginia. As
the result of his patient, self-denying toil, several churches and
schools have been established, and a new character has been given
to the whole community. In proof of this, I am permitted to quote
the following letter, voluntarily sent by the Prosecuting Attorney
of the county to Mr. Henry:

                      “AMELIA COURT HOUSE, Va., Jan. 31, 1883.

  DEAR SIR: There has been such a marked improvement in the
  conduct, character, morals and intelligence of the colored
  population of this county, and crime has diminished to such
  an extent with the past several years, that it is natural
  that an observing man should at once consider the cause or
  reason for such a changed state of affairs. In doing so, I am
  at once constrained to believe and to attribute it to your
  untiring zeal in the laudable effort to do good to that race
  whose training has been so long neglected. Your boldness in
  condemning the wrong and asserting and approving the right,
  has not only impressed the colored people and influenced their
  conduct in the right direction, but it has at the same time won
  for you the confidence and esteem of all the thinking portion
  of the white race who are interested in good government, and a
  well-ordered and law-abiding community. It is not surprising to
  thinking men that an immense amount of crime should have been
  the result of liberating the vast number of colored people of
  the South, and throwing them suddenly upon their own resources,
  with their wants unprovided for and with no training, when it
  had not been their habit to think or provide for themselves.
  Consequently, the sad result was that crime was prevalent
  throughout this whole Southern country. It therefore became
  sensible men to undertake to provide a remedy; and the remedy
  is, to educate and Christianize the race; and I am glad—indeed,
  happy—to be able to say that you have contributed your full
  share toward bringing about that happy result, for which this
  community ought to be profoundly grateful.

   “Now, for a moment, let us contrast the present state of
  things with the past, which is vivid in our recollection
  because of its sadness. I qualified as Prosecuting Attorney
  for this county at the April Term of the County Court 1870,
  and have held that office (with the exception of one term of
  four years) from that time to the present. It was no uncommon
  thing—indeed it was a common thing—to prosecute from two to
  four cases of felony at every term of the court, and I have
  prosecuted as many as seven felonies at one term of our Circuit
  Court, and the jail was full or crowded with those awaiting
  trial. But for the last four or five years crime has gradually
  diminished, until now it is a rare occurrence that we have a
  prisoner in jail awaiting trial or a felony to prosecute; and
  the jail is nearly all the time without an inmate. The present
  state of things is so different that it is a subject of remark.
  May He who directeth all things spare you long in the good work
  in which you have accomplished so much. Very respectfully and
  truly your friend,

                                               T. K. WEISIGER.”

This statement speaks loudly, not only as regards the particular
case mentioned, but as regards the system which we are pursuing to
elevate the colored people. Mr. Henry, during his studies in Howard
University, was aided by funds contributed in Great Britain for the
assistance of needy colored students, and it will be cheering to
those benefactors to hear of the good which is being accomplished
by this beneficiary. Will not other benefactors come to our help by
furnishing other endowments and scholarships?

       *       *       *       *       *


REVIVAL WORK AT FISK UNIVERSITY.

REV. H. S. BENNETT.

The religious history of Fisk University divides itself into two
portions, that before New Year and after. Before the New Year, the
week given to the Young Men’s Christian Association passed, and
the work of holding nightly prayer meetings was taken in hand by
the students. Several conversions resulted. After the new year had
set in and I had returned from my Northern trip, I felt that the
time had come for direct effort for the conversion of the students.
I, therefore, directed my preaching to that end and held nightly
meetings for inquirers. As a result two or three of the students
were converted. At length, being convinced that I could do little
more, I made no appointment for other meetings. At this point the
young men in Livingstone Hall came forward and offered to carry
on the meetings in their own way. I was glad to give them the
opportunity to go forward. This they did, visiting from room to
room and inviting the unconverted out. The result was that there
was a large increase in the interest. The inquiry meetings were
full, and from ten to fifteen were seeking Christ every night. This
work went on for several weeks and resulted in the conversion of
fifteen or more—twenty-two for the whole year. There is still some
interest, although other things have interfered to divert the minds
of the students from the direct effort for the salvation of souls.

       *       *       *       *       *


EMERSON INSTITUTE.

BY MISS EMMA CAUGHEY, MOBILE, ALA.

The accompanying cut of Emerson Institute presents it in its
new and enlarged proportions. Oct 3d, 1882, with much joy and
thanksgiving, we dedicated its new walls, “Pro Christo et
Humanitate.” It is a fine substantial building, well adapted to
our school work. A basement play-room under the entire building
furnishes protection to the children on rainy days. The first floor
contains three pleasant school-rooms, four halls and a library.
Four stair-ways lead to the play-room, and the same number lead up
to the second floor, where are three more cheery, well ventilated
school-rooms, separated from each other by uplifting sash doors,
by which the entire upper story may be thrown into one large hall.
Here we assemble for morning devotions, hold our public rhetoricals
and evening socials. Contributions from friends at the North have
enabled us to place a reading table in one corner of the normal
room, furnished with the best weeklies and monthlies, a handsome
clock and some tasteful mottoes on the wall, each of which we may
hope is a little rill flowing into that stream of silent influences
which serves not only to brighten the lives of the pupils but
to help them to a nobler manhood and a purer womanhood. We have
enrolled during the year three hundred and twenty-one different
pupils under the care of six teachers. We have an industrial
department connected with our school, in which sewing and fancy
work are taught. We meet for two hours each Friday evening at the
close of the regular session of school. This evening hour is a
happy climax to the week for the girls, but is a great tension upon
the nervous force of the teachers at the end of the week’s wear and
tear. We close this department of our school with a fair, where the
articles made by the girls are offered for sale, the proceeds of
which are to be divided between foreign missions and our own worthy
poor.

[Illustration: EMERSON INSTITUTE, MOBILE, ALA.]

       *       *       *       *       *


INDUSTRIAL WORK AT ATLANTA UNIVERSITY.

MR. H. M. SESSIONS.

Having been connected with this institution more than a year,
we have learned from the boys in school from all parts of the
South, as well as from our own observation in the State, of the
limited scope of the agricultural products in this section. Most
of the boys have been accustomed to farm work, and in answer to
the question, “What kind of crops have you been used to raising?”
they reply invariably, “corn and cotton.” It has been the custom
of the planters here to use their means, men, teams and credit to
raise cotton. While they are raising crops they run in debt for
provisions, and at the end of the year frequently fail to realize
enough from the crops to pay the bills. Some are learning the
better way of raising a variety of crops for the family, and a few
acres of cotton for a money crop. The great want of successful
farming is fertilizers. The land is so impoverished that there is
no use in trying to raise a crop without. With plenty of manure,
we can secure as good crops as can be raised anywhere. Our tables
were supplied last summer with a great variety of vegetables and
our barns filled with fodder. Twelve acres only out of the sixty
owned by the Institution have been under cultivation, our own table
with 240 boarders making a market. The advantages of climate enable
us to raise two or three crops a year on the same land. The soil
is capable of producing any and every variety of crops that can be
raised elsewhere in the United States.

Whatever possibilities may be attained in literary pursuits for
generations to come, most of the manual labor at the South will
be performed by the colored man. The great want at the present
time is skilled laborers. The abundant resources are awaiting men
as well as means for their development—men skilled in all the
useful trades, educated in both muscle and brain, such as can
plan as well as execute. There is a surplus of ignorant laborers
South who cannot set themselves to work at anything but the most
menial service. If the present generation can be instructed by
skilled labor how to get a good living and earn money to educate
their children, then the next generation can take a step higher.
The opportunities offered the boys here to learn the useful arts
will be enlarged. At the present time we are only developing the
agricultural department in a small way for want of means. We are
trying to utilize the labor of the boys for their advantage, as
well as profit to the Institution. With a fair supply of mulberry
trees, we propose to commence the culture of silk. This spring we
have twenty-five boys competing for the premiums offered for the
largest product of early garden vegetables grown on the square rod.
The work is to be done during play hours and the crop harvested
before the close of the term, the 15th of June. Monthly lectures
on important farm topics are given to the students. We need an
endowment of $30,000 for a school of agriculture, and the same
amount for the mechanic arts.

       *       *       *       *       *


AFRICA AT ATLANTA.

In a private letter Mrs. Chase writes about a young man from the
west coast of Africa as follows: I must tell you about Philip. We
had very interesting meetings last week. Thursday the topic was for
the church. Philip who had not had courage to speak in meetings
before this year, got up and said he was ashamed of having been so
afraid of being laughed at by the boys; he expected in a few years
to teach about Jesus in his own country—and it is your country,
too. He then went on with his intense earnestness and broken
English to tell of his home—how dear it was to him and how dear
his people were—how sad it was that they did not know about Jesus,
till I do not think there was a dry eye in the room. The meeting
the next night was a larger one, as we have no study hours Friday
night. We saw the effect of Philip’s thrilling words. More than
one referred to them. A young woman who decided to be a missionary
to Africa last year, said every word Philip spoke seemed meant for
her. “To think that boy, who was a heathen such a little while ago,
could justly say such things to us with our privileges, made me
feel condemned. I want to preach the gospel to the heathen. I pray
that I may be fitted for the blessed work. I don’t want money, I
don’t want fame, but I do want such a spirit that it shall be my
meat and drink to do my Father’s will.” Philip’s Bible, which he
brought with him, is very fine print, and has no references. He
wanted a new one, so as he had earned some money in summer, one of
the teachers purchased him one. He is so pleased with it he takes
it to bed with him. One day he asked his teacher if he could not
buy some silk to cover it with. When she suggested covering it with
paper, he did not like it at all. I am so glad he is with us, he is
a great power.

       *       *       *       *       *


ONE DAY.

BY MISS ADELE BREWER, RALEIGH, N.C.

Would you like to spend Sunday with us among the colored people
at the South? The bell for Sunday School sounded at nine o’clock.
At three, we answered the call for church. We saluted the sexton,
a pretty girl, who was ringing the bell as we entered. The neat
little church still had its Christmas trimmings. We were delighted
with everything, the earnest minister, the good organ, the
well-trained choir. Every word of the responsive reading was so
clearly enunciated that it was a pleasure to listen. The pastor’s
wife came in with her manly son and her wee baby. That smallest
auditor behaved well. The missionary was there with the orphan she
is training. Notices for the week were given out—Lyceum, Church
prayer meeting, and the Women’s prayer meeting.

After the benediction, before we had hardly thought of turning in
our places, we felt the pressure of a baby’s hand. Little Clara,
aged five, had hastened to us. She had come to church alone. It was
sweet to look at her and know what an angel of light she is. Her
mother, though an invalid, takes in washing. She hires some one
to carry the clothes. Clara wishes to grow. “Why?” “So I can tote
de clothes.” In former days, long before she came to earth, her
parents were prosperous. They bought land and built two houses, one
for themselves and one to rent. Her father, still in the prime of
life, is paralyzed and blind. Day after day he sits by the fire,
unable to read, or work, or move. We have seen his blind, twitching
face light tenderly at the touch of his only child. Clara led us
along slowly, and we chatted with the missionary and her friends.
One young lady has bought land, built a house for herself and
furnished it well with carpet and organ. She is helping her sisters
in their education. We met many whose friends were at school. We
shook hands with the good deacons.

Some young girls were waiting at home for us. They wished to talk
about “going North.” As soon as they had left, a friend sent by
us an orange to Mrs. Knowles. In her one dark room, over a smoky
fireplace, she was sitting, paralyzed, rheumatic and very “painy,”
without kith or kin to help her, dependent on neighbors for food,
wood and water; her lot did not seem an enviable one. “The children
are mighty kind to me.” Boys come in and cut a stick of wood at a
time. She cooks meal, her chief article of food, in three different
ways, “so as to have a little variety, you know.” Often suffers for
“suthing t’eat;” seldom knows whence the next dinner will come.

As we left the room we heard crying. Leaning by the fence, alone
and screaming, was a little girl. “What is it?” “A boy threw a rock
and hit me here,” showing her side. “Where is your home?” “Right
over yonder.” “Shall I take you there?” “No; mother is not there.”
It proved that her sister and friend were frolicking and helping
(?) Mrs. Knowles. Her sister answered the appeal for help. “Hush,
Queen; quit making such a fuss.” The friend explained: “She never
did like to be hit by a rock, nohow.” We noticed the feet of the
friend. A piece of leather tied around them, showing the bare toes.
Many children can not go to Sunday-school because they have no
shoes.

After tea we went to the S. S. Concert. In giving out the subject,
the teacher said she did not want to call it a Lying Concert,
though the verses were about lying, so she called it a Truth
Concert. The room was full. Little Clara’s mother could not go,
so the wee maiden invited a young lady to be her escort. The
concert was excellent. The texts were well recited and the pastor’s
remarks summed up the matter. At the close an appeal was made in
behalf of a poor and sick scholar. A member of her class carried
around the basket, and a dollar and seventy-nine cents was given
in response. This little church takes up three collections a day,
yet its members are very poor and the winter has been hard on all.
One family stayed in bed till late in the afternoon to save wood
to cook supper. A young man, sick with consumption, had nothing
provided for him but bacon and cornmeal, which his delicate
appetite loathed. It is hard to earn much, receiving thirty cents
a week for a washing. We asked a widow if she was comfortable when
her husband was alive. “Oh yes; I had plenty to eat, plenty to
eat. He was cross sometimes, as men are, but I always had plenty
to eat.” We lay down to rest that night with new feelings of
gratitude and shame. “What shall we render unto the Lord for all
His benefits?”

       *       *       *       *       *


A JUBILATE.

(Composed for the Commencement Exercises of Tillotson Institute.)

BY MISS ANGIE FULLER.

  A song, a song of joyous exultation,
    That where but late was darkness and despair,
  Harps upon the willows, hopeless lamentation,
  Sighing and moans, and foolish superstitions,
    The cringing fear and terror stricken wail,
  With all the miserable, the pitiful conditions
    Gross ignorance and bondage can entail,

  There now is light that promises to brighten,
    There now is thankful prayer and notes of praise,
  There now is hope, sweet hope, to cheer and lighten,
    A race oppressed and wronged in many ways;
  There now are minds aspiring and expanding
    And daily demonstrating they are strong,
  To answer to Progression’s stern demanding
    And take a place among the cultured throng.

  God-speed to those who lead this van of progress,
    Who work as pioneers in Wisdom’s fields;
  Proving to all the wondering, doubting people
    What grand results, fair mental culture yields.
  Still may they press undaunted onward, upward
    Greater achievements and successes win,
  While hopeful millions in their footsteps follow,
    And Heaven smiles approval most benign.

[Illustration: GREEN COVE SPRINGS, ST. JOHNS RIVER, FLA.]


COLOR LINE IN FLORIDA.

BY REV. ALBERT P. MILLER.

While the “color-line” is being freely discussed in the leading
Christian journals of the day, as to so-called “mixed churches,”
the following incident may show to the Christian world the attitude
taken by the African Methodist Episcopal Church—400,000 strong—with
whose work I was very pleasantly connected last year. One of our
preachers, a Rev. C. J. Croom, having charge of the Hamburg circuit
in the East Florida Conference, was last year holding a series of
revival meetings. The spirit waxed hot, and large numbers came
rolling in from every quarter night after night. Conversions began
to crown the efforts of the pastor, among the colored members of
the congregation. As is very often the case several white friends
were in attendance. One night after a soul-stirring sermon the
preacher called on all who wanted to be prayed for to come and bow
at the front seats. A great many came, and among these a white
woman, who that night was deeply convicted. Her mother, brother
and sister were terribly enraged, that she should be out so late
at a “nigger meeting,” and came down on her very heavily. The
next night, however, found her, more anxious than ever, at the
“nigger revival.” The mother, who would not go herself, sent her
son and daughter to bring their sister home. On arriving they
became so much interested in what was going on that they decided
to remain. They began to feel “funny.” Still they sat and looked
on and saw their sister again press forward for prayer. They
still felt “funny,” but couldn’t go. By and by the sister, who
sat in the audience, went to get her anxious sister, and take her
home. No sooner had she put her hands on her than she herself
fell under conviction, and both that night were happily converted
to God. Their brother at once became deeply concerned, and was
soon rejoicing with his sisters and the Negroes in the “liberty
wherewith Christ doth make his children free.”

“Big Sunday” came, day for communion and reception of members.
Candidates received on profession were to be baptized, either by
sprinkling or immersion. Our white brother and his two dear sisters
having been received into full membership chose to go down under
the water, which they did with several others, being baptized by
Bro. Croom. Some of the white neighbors were a little offended at
the conduct of both the colored preacher and his white brother
and sisters in the Lord, and asked him to leave. But he told them
frankly that he didn’t convert the candidates, and that if the same
God who had changed their hearts, led them also to seek admission
into his church, there was nothing, either in his Bible or his
discipline, that would prohibit their becoming regular members of
his church. Bro. Croom tells me that these three converts are among
the most faithful of his members, and that he “would be glad to
receive many more such members into the African Methodist Episcopal
Church, for God is no respecter of persons,” and why should we be?

       *       *       *       *       *


WOMAN’S MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

BY MISS M. K. LUNT, SELMA.

The Alabama Branch of the Woman’s Missionary Association held its
annual meeting in the Normal room of Talladega College, March
27. The attendance was good, and the reports from the local
societies very encouraging. The officers, with but two exceptions,
were re-elected to serve for the coming year. After devotional
exercises, Mrs. De Forest gave an address of welcome, in which
she reminded us of the important work God had put in our hands to
carry on, and that _our_ part is to be _doers_, leaving results
to Him. The local societies have given considerable time to
industrial work, disposing of clothing, quilts, and fancy articles,
aggregating the sum of $175, disbursing for Foreign Missions and
home interests $116.85, leaving a balance for further distribution.
Mothers’ meetings, children’s meetings, and sewing classes have
received their share of attention. At the public meeting in March,
in Selma, Mrs. McDougal, correspondent of the New York _Weekly
Witness_, was present, and all enjoyed her fresh, practical and
inspiring words.

Several papers were listened to with interest, the first read by
Miss Jillson, on “Our Duty to Foreign Missions and the means by
which an interest may be Promoted.” Miss Plimpton and Mrs. A. W.
Curtis followed in discussion on the subject. Mrs. Curtis spoke
of the joy her husband’s mother felt in giving three sons to the
missionary fields; how this love had been awakened in her children
by reading to them from the _Missionary Herald_. Mrs. Andrews read
letters of greeting from the President and Secretary of the Boston
Association. Miss Chafin sent a paper, on “Do we owe a Tenth to the
Lord?”

A poem was read by Miss Partridge, “So Much to do at Home.” In
this an African Chief is begging for some Christian teachers to go
with him to lead his people to the Saviour, but is denied because
there is so much at home to be done. Mrs. Fay gave a talk on “How
to organize Missionary Societies,” urging the members of those
churches who have no such organization to form one at once.

Miss Mickle presented another paper on “Hath She Done what She
Could?” Mrs. Steele of Chattanooga, Tenn., was present and offered
the closing prayer. Singing was interspersed, and we felt that the
hours had brought to us an encouragement and strength which will
make us more hopeful for the future.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES FROM THE FIELD.

—A Welsh Cong. Church has been organized at Rock Creek, Tenn., with
22 members, by the Rev. Wm. H. Thomas.

—Rev. L. C. Joell, a recent graduate of the Theol. Dept. of Howard
University, has been appointed for church work at Greenwood, S.C.

—More than two score souls are reported to have been converted at a
series of meetings conducted by Revs. Imes and Fields at Memphis,
Tenn.

—A revival is reported in connection with the labors of Rev. B. F.
Foster at Fayetteville, Ark.

—Rev. Milus Harris, of Talladega, is conducting school and church
services at Tecumseh, Ala., in the building erected by the Tecumseh
Iron Co.

—A church of fourteen members has been recognized by Council at
Jackson, Miss. The sermon was by Supt. Roy. Most of the members had
been students at Tougaloo University.

—The Mississippi Association of Cong. Churches and ministers was
organized at Tougaloo, Miss., March 31. Pres. Pope and Rev. C.
L. Harris were elected as delegates to the National Council. A
missionary committee was appointed to take charge of two missions
already established.

—Supt. Roy has organized a church of ten members at Knoxville,
Tenn., which was recognized by Council April 22. Rev. Simon Peter
Smith, from Washington, has been assigned to this charge. A church
edifice has been secured.

—The Central Church, New Orleans, under the ministration of Rev.
Dr. Alexander, has received forty new members during the year. The
church pays $50 a month towards the pastor’s salary.

—Miss Gerrish, who has been sustained by the ladies of Iowa, as
missionary, in connection with the Central Church, New Orleans, has
been greatly blessed in her work done in the mothers’ meeting and
the sewing class. Twelve hundred calls were made by her during the
first six months of her service.

—A church was organized at Fayetteville, Ark., with nine members,
April 15. Supt. Roy and Rev. B. F. Foster, the pastor of the
church, were in attendance. At the first communion season the
church was made happy in the use of a new communion set and an
outfit of chapel lamps from Rev. Geo. M. Boynton’s people, Jamaica
Plain, Mass.

—The Spirit of God has been poured out upon both church and school
at the Le Moyne Institute. In the normal department of the school
there are but six or eight who do not profess Christ. Eighty per
cent. of all the students are reported to be seeking to lead
Christian lives. Over fifty souls have recently professed faith in
Christ, about twenty of whom will soon be added to the church.

—Prof. Hitchcock, of Straight University, New Orleans, has
interested parties on the ground to provide for orange and other
fruit trees to be planted on the square in connection with the
University buildings. He is anxious, however, to secure additional
funds in order that the planting may be sufficient and immediate.

—A new church has been organized at Birmingham, Ala., under the
guidance of Supt. Roy. Rev. Andrew J. Headen has been chosen
pastor, and the work is now being carried on with good success.

—Rev. C. W. Francis, of Atlanta, reports the conversion of eighteen
students in connection with the University. One is a member of the
graduating class and another has been a Roman Catholic.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NEW MISSION IN SOUTH CHINA.

BY REV. W. C. POND.

The memorable event of the month of February—so far as our work is
concerned—is the inauguration of the mission of the American Board
to Hong Kong, and through Hong Kong to those districts of South
China from which most of our Chinese have come. Rev. C. R. Hager, a
recent graduate of our Pacific Theological Seminary, and for more
than a year past a very successful and greatly beloved pastor at
Antioch, in this State, having offered himself to the Board as a
Foreign Missionary, was at our own suggestion and request appointed
to take charge of this new work, and was ordained as a Missionary
at Bethany Church, on Friday, Feb. 16. One of the exercises at the
ordination service was an address by Jee Gam, a portion of which,
I trust, can be crowded into the space allotted in the MISSIONARY
to our work. It will scarcely be necessary for me to add anything,
unless it be to say that to my faith this work thus begun looms up
in grand proportions, as fraught with most beneficent results. I
am prepared in spirit patiently to wait—prepared, if such be God’s
will, utterly to fail—but my faith feels so strong, my hopes are so
high, so bright, so confident, that I seem to myself already to be
entering on the harvest, and the joy of harvest fills my heart.


JEE GAM’S ADDRESS.

It was ten years ago when our Chinese brethren first felt the
need of a mission in China at or near the districts from which
most of our brethren came. They grew more and more anxious for
this mission, when they heard of the aid and refuge given to the
persecuted Christians by the other mission in Canton city.

The first three years we often expressed our great desire among
ourselves for this mission, but never thought of telling our
superintendent, Rev. W. C. Pond. Not a word was said to him
until at our usual Wednesday afternoon Bible class, about seven
years ago, when the subject of foreign missions was accidentally
mentioned. We then told Rev. W. C. Pond what we so much desired.
He at once approved of it. Hong Kong was chosen for the seat of
this mission, and Mr. Pond requested that those who were able to
write a letter should do so, explaining why this mission was so
much needed. He accordingly forwarded these letters to the American
Missionary Association. Though the Association sympathized with
us in our want, yet how this mission could be established looked
very doubtful. The matter was left to stand; but we remembered
that James tells us to ask in faith, nothing wavering, and we knew
that God was able to supply all our needs; so we kept on praying.
In the first part of October, 1879, I was greatly surprised by the
very generous invitation which the American Missionary Association
tendered me to attend its annual meeting at Chicago. I started for
the East, but thought nothing of this Hong Kong mission until at
the annual meeting, when I felt moved by the Holy Spirit to make
an earnest plea for it. I also spoke for it at all the meetings I
attended while East.

On the evening of the 4th of August, 1882 (the same day the Chinese
Restriction bill went into effect), the good news came through our
superintendent that the American Board had consented to establish
the Hong Kong Mission. Oh, how my heart, filled to overflowing,
went out to God in thanksgiving and praise! Immediately we called
the brethren to tell them the good news. Christ has told us to
ask and we shall receive; yet, when this ten years’ prayer was
answered, it seemed almost too much to believe, and we are here
this evening to praise God once more for his love to us and our
benighted countrymen in China. * * *

Having Hong Kong for headquarters, missionaries and teachers can
be sent from there to preach and teach in the villages from which
our young men come. Besides this, the English language is used
more in Hong Kong than in any other part of China, and the Chinese
living there, or those visiting that place, could not be reached
in a more efficient manner than by opening the same kind of free
schools for them that you have opened for us here. They need to
know the English language. Of course there are public schools,
where both the English and Chinese languages are taught by the
British Government, but all have their sessions in the daytime:
consequently, the children are the only ones benefited by these
schools. There remains the laboring class unreached. If a free
evening school is opened, I have no doubt that much good could
be done among them. Moreover, Hong Kong is a great highway to
all foreign ports, especially San Francisco. Through Hong Kong
nearly all the Chinese in the United States have come and will
return. If a general mission could be established at this port,
much co-operating work could be accomplished between our missions
here and that at Hong Kong. Christian Chinese returning home would
receive letters of introduction to the superintendent of the Hong
Kong mission. This superintendent would have pastoral care over
them, and would be a very great help in time of persecution.
Converts would be made firmer in faith, and more earnest in leading
others to Christ.

The Congregational Association of Christian Chinese, at its last
annual meeting, voted to give $500 toward the establishing of this
Hong Kong mission, and do all in its power to help in the future.
God be praised, for he has shown his wonderful love to China. He
is to be praised for this beloved brother, who so kindly offers
himself for the Master’s service. He is to be praised for the
American Board which sends him. May the Lord raise up many more
like workers, who shall devote their lives to China.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let me add that besides this gift of money, our mission sends with
Mr. Hager one of our very best helpers, Lee Sam. We shall miss him
greatly, but we have plead for this new work, expecting that it
would draw upon us in that way largely. To raise up and train men
for Gospel work among the millions beyond the sea, will now be one
of the chief ends to be kept in view in our work in California. And
because of this, we ask with an intensity of desire scarcely known
to us before, a place in the prayers of God’s people throughout our
whole land.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.


THE COMING OF THE ORGAN.

BY MRS. WALTER E. C. WRIGHT, BEREA, KY.

“Pine Grove College,” as it is called in Jackson County, needed
an organ; there was no doubt about that. But the likelihood of
obtaining it seemed small. Away up there in the mountains of
Kentucky, there were few who had ever seen an organ, and only
the teacher knew how much it would help in the day school, the
Sunday-school and the preaching services. So Miss Barton sang
herself hoarse trying to teach the children to sing by rote, and on
Sunday the minister had to line the hymns for want of books. (Your
grandmamma can tell you what I mean by “_lining_ the hymn.”) In all
the mountain churches, both colored and white, the people always
sing in that way, and having no organ to keep them together, they
come out at the end one behind the other, like the “rounds” you
sing at school.

[Illustration: MOUNTAIN FAMILY SINGING PSALMS.]

One day a teacher from Berea went up to visit the school, and when
she saw the bright, eager faces of the children, and the effort
the teacher was making to have them learn to sing, she said, “Why,
how much you need an organ here. It would lift these children
into a whole new world of ideas.” “Yes, I know it,” answered Miss
Barton, “but where is it to come from?” Well, Miss D. went home and
thought it over, and then wrote to Miss Barton that if the people
there would raise thirty dollars, she would see that they had an
organ. Miss Barton did not feel much encouraged, for the people in
that region are not rich, and one dollar looks very large to them.
However, she read Miss D.’s letter to them at Sabbath school, and
explained what an advantage it would be to have the instrument to
use. To her great surprise they pledged the amount at once, though
many of them cannot afford sugar in their coffee, or butter on the
corn bread, which, with bacon, is the staple of their living. I
have not time to tell how Miss D. raised the rest of the money,
how she found a dealer who had a very fine organ to sell at second
hand, and who threw off fifteen dollars when he found for what
she wanted it—nor how one friend in Tallmadge and another in Akron
helped on, and at last the organ was ordered and sent. It was
expected on a certain Saturday, and on Sunday morning you might
have seen the people gathering in unusually large numbers. All who
did not walk came on horseback. There a mother with her baby on
her arm, and a little girl behind her on the family horse. Here
the father, with a three-year-old boy behind him on the colt, and
yonder three older children on another horse, all sitting with that
easy security they express when they say “I was born on a horse,”
and thinking no more about it than you do when you ride in a street
car.

But when the people reached the school-house their faces fell as
they came in one after another and saw there was no organ on the
platform. The wagon had broken down bringing it over the almost
impassable roads from the station twenty miles away, and at last
Sunday-school was commenced with a feeling of disappointment in all
hearts. Even brave Miss Barton felt a lump in her throat, for she
had counted on it like the meeting of an old friend in a strange
land. But just in the middle of the lesson the creaking of wheels
was heard and some men came in with _something_ still encased in
the box in which it was packed. No more lesson that day. Every boy
and girl, colored and white, was as eager and curious as if this
was a stray cage from some menagerie. Finally, with some little
trouble, the packing-case was removed, and there was a plain, quiet
little walnut thing, looking some like a small cupboard, and now
the question arose on which side was it made to stand? The teacher,
seeing the dilemma, suggested the proper base, on which it was
firmly placed. Then a chair was brought, some books piled on it—and
_then_ they found there was no key. But somebody produced a nail,
the cover was lifted, and there was their organ smiling at them
and showing every one of its pretty white teeth. And oh, when the
wonderful thing began to sing, how pleased they were! The children
forgot that they too could sing

  “Praise God from whom all blessings flow,”

while listening to the beautiful, strange voice. Presently they
gained courage and joined in the Gospel hymns (which the common
people _do_ sing gladly), and sang, and sang, and sang, all through
the time for Sabbath school and all through the time for preaching.

I think the angels hearing the sounds must have rejoiced that day
with great hope for the souls that might be won to repentance
through the Coming of the Organ.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR APRIL, 1883.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $215.13.

    Bath. Central Ch. and Soc., 45; Winter St.
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., 35.15                              $80.15
    Bethel. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          10.24
    Brewer. Cong. Ch.                                          9.50
    Buxton. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           4.00
    East Orrington. Cong. Sab. Sch.                            2.04
    East Otisfield. Mrs. Susan Lovell, 5; Mrs.
      Sarah P. Morton, 2; Rev. J Loring, 1.75;
      Mrs. A. Lovewell, 1; Mrs. M. H. Jennings, 25c           10.00
    Gorham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                22.78
    Gorham. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Needmore Chapel,
      Talladega C._                                           19.17
    Newport. Mrs. M. S. Nickerson                              0.50
    South Paris. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            6.25
    Norway. Mrs. M. K. Frost                                   0.50
    Waldoborough. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    10.00
    Wells. Barak Maxwell                                      20.00
    Winthrop. Cong. Ch.                                       17.00
    York. “A Friend,” by Rev. D. B. Sewall                     3.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $430.07.

    Amherst. Cong. Ch.                                        15.70
    Atkinson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               8.00
    Colebrook. “E. C. W.”                                      2.00
    Concord. North Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      10.00
    Exeter. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        122.08
    Exeter. Cong. Ch. 2 Bbls of C., _for Tillotson
      C. & N. Inst._ Mrs. Odlin _for Freight_                  3.00
    East Alstead. Rev G. A. Beckwith, Box Books,
      _for Library, Macon, Ga._
    Great Falls. Mission Fund, Cong. Soc. 11.25
      and Bbl. of C. _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                     11.25
    Hillsborough Bridge. Cong. Ch.                             3.00
    Keene. First Cong. Sab. Sch., 32.55; George
      Cooke, 5                                                37.55
    Lisbon. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          14.00
    Mason. Cong. Ch.                                           9.00
    Nashua. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          16.74
    New Boston. “A Friend” (of which 50 _for
      Chinese and 25 for Indian M._)                         100.00
    New Ipswich. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        20.00
    North Hampton. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Savannah, Ga._                              21.00
    Orford. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 16; “H. H. C.,” 1.
      “F. B.” 25c                                             17.25
    Orfordville. D. T Hale                                     5.00
    Piermont. Cong. Sab. Sch., 5; E. Ford, 5                  10.00
    Portsmouth. Rev. W. W. Dow                                 2.00
    Shelburne. Mrs. Mary C. Ingalls                            2.50
    Wilton. Rev. A. E. Tracy, Bbl. C., _for Macon,
      Ga._


  VERMONT, $530.68.

    Brattleborough. Helen J. Preston, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
    Brookfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     10.35
    Cambridge. Mr. and Mrs. M. Safford                        38.52
    Clarendon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              9.27
    Granby and Victory. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     2.00
    Newport. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               11.65
    Norwich. Mrs. H. Burton                                    2.00
    Manchester. Cong. Ch., 122.68; A. Hemenway, 5            127.68
    Rochester. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Two bbls. C.
      _for Talladega C._
    Rutland. Cong. Ch.                                       243.74
    Saxton’s River. Rev. William Sewall, Pkg. of
      C., _for Atlanta U._
    Thetford. Cong. and Soc.                                  12.14
    Townshend. “Miss E. M. B.”                                 5.00
    ——. “L. G.”                                                5.00
    West Brattleborough. Cong. Ch., and Soc. to
      const. MRS. MARY W. CLARK L. M.                         31.53
    West Brattleborough. Ladies of Cong. Soc., 2
      Bbls. of C. _for Talladega. C., 5 for
      Freight_                                                 5.00
    West Hartford. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                   2.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $13,166.38.

    Andover. West Parish Juv. Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
    Andover. Mrs. Sophia Tufts, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            5 00
    Andover. The late Mrs. Caroline T. Jackson                17.00
    Amesbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              10.75
    Amherst. First Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
    Amherst. “Friends,” _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                      1.00
    Ashburnham. Marshall Wetherbee                             2.00
    Attleborough. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     8.86
    Auburn. Cong. Sab. Sch. (of which 11.66 for
      Indian and Chinese M.)                                  17.50
    Beverly. Ladies’ M. C. of Cong. Ch., 20 pair
      of sheets, _for Fisk U._
    Billerica. Trinitarian Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      14.97; Sab. Sch., 8.35, bal. to const. REV.
      FREDERICK. A. WILSON L. M.                              23.32
    Boston. Central Ch. and Soc., 1,008.64; Chas.
      C. Barry, 25; “A Friend,” 5; M. A. Willard, 1        1,039.64
    Boston. N. B. Goodnow, 5; “A Friend,” 1; Lee &
      Shepard, books, val. 17, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            6.00
    Boston and vicinity. Ladies, Seven boxes
      Bedding, _for Fisk U._
    Boxborough. Mary Stone                                    10.00
    Boxford. Miss Mary Sawyer, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            1.00
    Brocton. Porter Evan. Ch.                                 51.78
    Brookline. Harvard Ch. and Soc.                           87.83
    Cambridgeport. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., 30, to
      const. MRS. CAROLINE F. BRADSHAW, L. M.;
      Pilgrim Ch., 13.42                                      43.42
    Charlestown. Winthrop Ch. and Soc.                        74.47
    Chelsea. “Ladies Union Home Miss. Band,” _for
      Lady Missionary, Chattanooga, Tenn._                    40 00
    Coleraine. Rev. D. A. Strong                               0.50
    Concord. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         19.26
    Dedham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          17 04
    Dorchester. Village Ch. and Soc.                          38.37
    Dracut. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      JAMES THOMPSON, L. M.                                   40.00
    Dunstable. Evan. Ch. and Soc.                             20.00
    Enfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               55.00
    Essex. “Helping Hand Soc.” of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Dakota M._                                 50.00
    Essex. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 26.00
    Essex Co. “A Friend,”                                     15.00
    East Charlemont. Dea. Phineas Field                        2.00
    East Hampton. Ladies Benev. Soc. Payson Cong.
      Ch. Two Bbls. of C., 5 _for Freight, for
      Talladega C._                                            5.00
    Fall River. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    44.80
    Falmouth. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        16.00
    Florence. Florence Cong. Ch.                              27.78
    Franklin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              33.09
    Granby. Mrs. A. Bliss, _for Atlanta, Ga._                  5.00
    Granville. C. Holcomb and wife                            10.00
    Globe Village. B. U. Bugbee, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                 2.50
    Gloucester. Addie W. Proctor, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 1.00
    Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch. ($30 of which
      from Ladies to const. MISS MARY D. WILLIAMS,
      L. M.)                                                  68.09
    Holbrook. Ladies Sew. Circle, Bbl. and Box C.,
      _for Macon, Ga., 6 for Freight_                          6.00
    Holliston. “Friends.” 13.50; Primary Class
      Cong. Sab. Sch., 5, _for Student Aid_;
      “Friend,” Carpet (Val. 22.50), _for teachers
      room, Stone Hall_. Ladies Benev. Soc., of
      Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Talladega C._               18.50
    Holyoke. Second Cong. Ch.                                 14.84
    Ipswich. “Friends of the Cause”                            4.00
    Lancaster. Evan. Cong. Sab. Sch., Box S. S.
      Books _for McIntosh, Ga._
    Lincoln. “A Friend,” _for Chinese M._                      1.00
    Malden. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          81.35
    Marblehead. Hon. J. J. H. Gregory, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                             500.00
    Medford. “A Friend,” Bickford Knitting
      Machine, _for Atlanta U._
    Milford. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Hampton N. and
      A. Inst_                                                40.00
    Milford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         93.16
    Monson. Cong. Ch.                                         43.04
    Montague. First Cong. Ch.                                 14.41
    Natick. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          25.00
    Natick. Cong Ch., 15; “Friends,” 10; Harrison
      Harwood, 5; S. E. Howard, 5, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      35.00
    Newton. Freedman’s Aid Sew. Cir., Bbl. of C.,
      _for Macon, Ga._
    Newton Centre. Ladies Benev. Soc. _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        50.00
    Newton Centre. First Cong. Ch. & Soc.                     55.48
    Newtonville. Ladies of Cong. Ch. & Soc. Bbl.
      and Box of C, _for Raleigh, N.C._
    North Adams. First Cong. Ch.                              25.71
    Northampton. A. L. Williston 525; First Cong.
      Ch., 254.82; “A Friend” 100                            879.82
    Oxford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          24.00
    Peabody. South Ch. and Soc.                              130.00
    Peabody. Mrs. W. G. Sperry, _for Atlanta, Ga._             1.00
    Pittsfield. Ladies of Free Will Soc. First
      Cong Ch., Bbl. of C. (Val. 56), _for
      Atlanta. U._
    Reading. Coll. by Mrs. Temple _for Freight_                4.00
    Reading. Ladies of Bethesda Ch. and Soc., Bbl.
      of C. (Val. 25), _for Fisk U._
    Rehoboth. Cong. Ch.                                       31.48
    Royalston. Mrs. E. B. Ripley, Box Bedding,
      _for Talladega C._
    Salem. Young Ladies’ Mission Circle of Tab.
      Ch., _for Dakota M._                                    50.00
    Salem. Tabernacle Ch. Sab. Sch., Primary
      class, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                  20.00
    Somerville. Franklin St. Ch. & Soc.                       95.68
    South Amherst. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.39
    South Deerfield. Mrs. M. C. Tilton                         2.00
    South Framingham. Young Peoples’ Benev. Soc.,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         50.00
    South Hadley. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    30.00
    Springfield. “H. M.” 500; South Cong. Ch.
      28.62; First Cong. Ch., 20.85                          549.47
    Springfield. Mrs. P. Burnham, _for Indian M._              0.50
    Stoneham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              36.00
    Sunderland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            60.00
    Taunton. Dr. J. S. Andrews, 17, _for Student
      Aid_; Ladies Soc. of Broadway Ch., Bbl. of
      C., _for Atlanta U._                                    17.00
    Townsend. Cong. Sab. Sch., 5, “L. H. S.” 5                10.00
    Townsend Harbor. Box Mission Goods, by Mrs.
      Ralph Ball, _for Ladies’ Island, S.C._
    Wakefield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             49.03
    Walpole. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      32.00
    Ware. East Cong. Ch. and Soc, to const.
      FREDERICK C. BLOOD, F. D. WINSLOW, MISS
      CARRIE GIBBS, MISS BELLE NAYLOR, L. Ms.                403.45
    Watertown. Phillips Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      50.00
    West Berlin. Miss S. C. Larkin, _for Atlanta,
      Ga._                                                     1.00
    West Boylston. “Willing Workers” of Cong. Ch.,
      15 _for furnishing Stone Hall_, 10 _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                25.00
    West Brookfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       24.00
    Westfield. First Cong. Ch., 70; Second Cong.
      Ch., 23.91; Mrs. Charlotte W. Fowler, 5                 98.91
    West Gloucester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        8.62
    Westhampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., by Wm. J.
      Edwards, “S. S.” and S. A. Phelps, 31; Cong.
      Sab. Sch., 13.52; “A Friend,” 25                        69.52
    West Townsend. Mrs. Samuel Jenkins, deceased,
      by Julia A. Cumings                                      5.00
    Wellesley Hills. B. F. Parker, 5 _for Student
      Aid_; Ladies of Cong. Soc., Bbl. of C., 1.65
      _for Freight, for Talladega C._                          6.65
    Wilmington. “Friends,” by Mrs. H. G. Noyes,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         25.00
    Winchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., ad’l.              119.85
    Worcester. Union Ch. and Soc.                            114.00
    Worcester. Ladies of Piedmont Ch., _Box of C.,
      for Talladega C._
    Yarmouth. Bbl of C., by Rev. J. W. Dodge, _for
      Wilmington, N.C._
    ——. “A Friend”                                            10.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $6,036.86

    LEGACIES.

    Danvers. Estate of Benjamin Hutchinson, by
      Elijah Hutchinson, Ex.                                  25.00
    Taunton. Estate of Mary Ide, by Stephen
      Pierce, Ex.                                          7,104.52
                                                          ---------
                                                         $13,166.38


  RHODE ISLAND, $52.52.

    Kingston. H. J. Wells                                     15.00
    Little Compton. Sab. Sch. of United Cong. Ch.,
      15.62; “A Friend,” 5; “Thank Offering,” 1.38            22.00
    Providence. Miss N. Marsh, 3 pkgs. Papers,
      _for Little Rock, Ark._
    Slatersville. Cong. Church.                               15.52


  CONNECTICUT, $2,308.58.

    Bethlehem. Cong. Ch., 12.26; “A Friend,” 10               22.26
    Birmingham. Cong. Ch., 65.02; George W.
      Shelton, 10                                             75.02
    Bolton. Cong. Ch.                                         11.00
    Branford. “H. G. H.”                                       5.00
    Bridgeport. Park St. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                   60.00
    Bristol. Cong. Ch.                                        93.88
    Clinton. Cong. Ch., _for Tillotson C. & N.
      Inst._                                                  10.12
    Colchester. Josiah Gillette                                5.00
    Collinsville. M. McNary Spencer                            2.00
    Essex. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             30.50
    East Hampton. Cong. Ch.                                   25.86
    East Hartland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         20.00
    East Haven. Cong. Ch.                                      8.05
    East Windsor. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    10.00
    Darien. Cong. Ch.                                         50.00
    Farmington. Cong. Ch.                                     60.98
    Franklin. Cong. Ch.                                        9.00
    Guilford. First Cong. Ch.                                 12.00
    Hartford. Mrs. C. R. Hillyer, to const. LYMAN
      BEECHER STOWE L. M.                                     30.00
    Hartford. W. J. Wood _for Theo. Dept.
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Jewett City. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      MRS. FRANCES C. CARPENTER L. M.                         20.00
    Lakeville. Mrs. M. H. Williams                            10.00
    Ledyard. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   6.31
    Mansfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      10.82
    Mansfield Center. First Cong. Ch.                         10.00
    Meriden. Center Church                                    29.00
    Milford. Rev. G. H. Griffin, 25 Books, _for
      prizes, Macon, Ga._
    New Britain. South Cong. Ch., 177.40; Members
      South Cong. Ch. (special) 15; to const. J.
      N. CARLETON, J. WARREN TUCK, JOHN N.
      BARTLETT, GEORGE A. CONKLING, WILLIAM E.
      LATHAM and WM. H. HART L. Ms                           192.40
    New Haven. First Ch., 195.65; Church of the
      Redeemer, 100; Edwin Shelley, 2                        297.65
    New Haven. Miss McAllister’s Class, North Ch.
      Sab. Sch., _for John Brown, Steamer_                     5.00
    Newington. Cong. Sab. Sch., Box of Toys, _for
      Talladega C._, 1, _for Freight_                          1.00
    North Coventry. Cong. Ch.                                 42.00
    Plantsville. Cong. Ch.                                   255.20
    Plantsville. “Friends” by L. C. Clark, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                75.00
    Putnam. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            25.00
    Rockville. First Cong. Ch., $30 of which to
      const. GEORGE N. BRIGHAM L. M.                         133.50
    Seymour. Cong. Ch.                                        14.00
    Sherman. Cong. Ch.                                        17.00
    Terryville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           35.00
    Unionville. 2 Bbls C., Mrs. James A. Smith 5,
      _for Little Rock Ark._                                   5.00
    Waterbury. Mrs. Chas. Benedict, Clock, _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Westminster. Rev. & Mrs. S. B. Carter                      5.00
    West Stafford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         11.00
    Whitneyville. Cong. Ch.                                   25.00
    Windsor Locks. Young Ladies’ Soc., Bbl. of
      Bedding, _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst._
    Woodbridge. Cong. Ch.                                      8.03
    Woodbury. Class No. 13, North Ch. Sab. Sch., 5
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._, and 5 _for ed.
      Indian Girls, Hampton N. & A. Inst._                    10.00
    ——. “A Friend”                                           500.00


  NEW YORK, $3,789.14.

    Baldwinsville. Howard Cutler                              25.00
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Missionaries at Fernandina, Fla. and Ladies’
      Island, S.C._                                          175.00
    Brooklyn. H. M. Wiggins, 50c.; REV. S. B.
      Halliday, Pkg. Books                                     0.50
    Bristol. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           13.00
    Buffalo. First Cong. Ch.                                  70.00
    Buffalo. Mrs. W. G. Bancroft, _for Tillotson
      C. and N. Inst._                                        50.00
    Cooperstown. C. Stoddard, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            5.00
    Crown Point. First Cong. Ch., 34.02; Second
      Cong Ch. 3                                              37.02
    Gilbertsville. A. Wood, A.M.                               5.00
    Homer. Four Classes in Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                               8.00
    Jamesport. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
    Little Falls. Young Ladies Circle, Presb. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         10.00
    New York. Broadway Tabernacle Ch.                        749.49
    New York. Broadway Tabernacle Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    New York. S. T. Gordon, 51 copies “Song
      Garner.”
    Norwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. MRS.
      HANNAH M. TIFFINY, L. M.                                38.83
    Oneida. Edward Loomis                                      5.00
    Penn Yan. W. M. Taylor                                     2.50
    Spenceport. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                           17.50
    Syracuse. Mrs. Clara C. Clarke, 7.30; Miss F.
      Amelia Clarke, 1                                         8.30
    Troy. John H. Kellogg, Pkg. Books, _for
      Library, Macon, Ga._
    Westmoreland. First Cong. Ch.                              9.00
    West Yaphank. Mrs. Hannah M. Overton                       5.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $1,289.14

    LEGACY.

    Waverly. Estate of Phebe Hepburne by Howard
      Elmer. Ex.                                           2,500.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $3,789.14


  NEW JERSEY, $396.00.

    Highlands. Rev. R. R. Proudfit                            10.00
    Jersey City. “A Friend”                                   10.00
    Montclair. First Cong. Ch.                               345.00
    Orange Valley. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                            5.00
    Paterson. Auburn St. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                10.00
    Raritan. Miss Sarah Provost, Box of Papers,
      etc.
    Waverly. Mission Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           16.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $62.75.

    Philadelphia. Central Cong. Ch., adl.                     17.75
    Sewickley. Lucy F. Bittinger, _for Dakota M._             10.00
    West Alexander. Rural Mite Soc., 25.00; Thomas
      McCleery, 10.00                                         35.00


  OHIO, $1,855.00.

    Aurora. Cong. Ch.                                         20.00
    Bellevue. Young People’s Miss’y Soc. of Cong.
      Ch.                                                     10.00
    Belpre. Cong. Ch.                                         30.63
    Bryan. S. E. Blakeslee, _for Indian M._                    5.00
    Castalia. Cong. Ch. 3.85 and Sab. Sch. 1.21                5.06
    Cleveland. Jennings Ave. Cong. Ch. 96.75.
      First Cong. Ch. 19.51                                  116.26
    Cleveland. Daniel P. Eells, 50; Young People’s
      Miss’y Soc., 25; Dea. S. H. Sheldon, 10; S.
      C. Smith, 10; Henry M. Brooks, 3, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              98.00
    Columbus. First Cong. Ch., to const. DEA. B.
      D. HILLS, DEA. I. W. CHAMBERLAIN, REV. BENJ.
      TALBOT, GEO. W. BRIGHT, DR. HENRY S.
      BABBITT, MRS. HARRIET E. IDE, MRS. JOHN B.
      HALL, MRS. B. F. REES and DEA. JEROME C.
      BRIGGS, L. Ms.                                         264.00
    Conneut. H. E. Pond                                        5.00
    Cuyahoga Falls. Cong. Sab. Sch.                            9.84
    Galion. Mrs. Campbell and E. C. Lindlay, _for
      Atlanta, Ga._                                            2.00
    Mechanicsburg. Mrs. M. K. Howard                           1.00
    Napoleon. Mrs. N. B. Palmer                                1.00
    North Bloomfield. “Friends,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           35.00
    Oberlin. J. W. Merrill                                    90.00
    Oberlin. Ladies’ Soc. of Second Cong. Ch.,
      _for Lady Missionary, Atlanta, Ga._                     75.00
    Paddy’s Run. Cong. Ch.                                    22.30
    Sandusky. First Cong. Ch., to const. ADOLPH M.
      LEVE L. M.                                              40.91
    Springfield. Miss Anna Rice, _for Little Rock,
      Ark._                                                    2.00
    Tallmadge. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                 7.00
    Toledo. Mrs. Eliza H. Weed                                10.00
    Unionville. Mrs. A. S. Hardy, S. S. Papers,
      _for Little Rock, Ark._
    West Williamsfield. Cong. Ch.                              4.00
    Youngstown. “Mrs. J. D. W.” _for Lady
      Missionary, Savannah, Ga._                               1.00
                                                          ---------
                                                            $855.00

    LEGACY.

    Bellevue. Estate of Mrs. Elvira Boise, by
      Spencer W. Boise, Ex.                                1,000.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $1,855.00


  INDIANA, $5.00.

    New Corydon. Geo. Stolz                                    5.00


  ILLINOIS, $1,475.46.

    Batavia. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           18.24
    Bunker Hill. Cong. Ch.                                    26.10
    Chesterfield. Miss L. M. Lawson, basted
      patchwork, _for Little Rock, Ark._
    Chicago. Plymouth Cong. Ch., 160.72; New
      England Cong. Ch., 33.33; Leavitt St. Cong
      Ch., 30.24; Theo. Sem. Missionary Soc, 7.10            231.39
    Chicago. Ladies’ Aid Soc. of Plymouth Ch.,
      _for Lady Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                     50.00
    Chicago. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Chicago. W. W. Catlin. _for Atlanta, Ga._                  4.35
    Danville. Friends, 10 _for Student Aid_;
      Ladies Soc. of Presb. Ch., Bbl. of C. _for
      Talladega C._, 1.30 _for Freight_                       11.30
    Galesburg. “A Friend,” _for Avery Inst.,
      Charleston S.C._                                        25.00
    Griggsville. Mrs. James McWilliams                         2.00
    Fairview. Cong. Ch.                                        1.56
    Farmington. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. LILLIAN
      STERNBERG L. M.                                         89.42
    Ivanhoe. “The Gleaners.”                                  25.00
    Kewanee. Missy. Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                               20.00
    Oak Park. S. W. Packard, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                50.00
    Oak Park. O. Packard’s Boys’ Class, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              17.00
    Oswego. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                    7.47
    Providence. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           14.65
    Rockton. Cong. Ch.                                        16.72
    Victoria. Cong. Ch.                                        2.37
    Wilmette. Cong. Ch.                                       54.50
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch.                                       7.39
    Wyanet. J. R. Phelps                                       1.00
    ——. “A Friend of A. M. A.”                               500.00
    ——. “A Friend,” _for Talladega C._                       250.00


  MICHIGAN, $530.09.

    Alamo. Julius Hackley                                     10.00
    Allegan. Cong. Ch.                                        26.10
    Alpena. Miss Farwell, Pkg. of C., _for Atlanta
      U._
    Ann Arbor. “Friends,” _for Matron’s room,
      Straight U._                                            11.00
    Benzonia. “Friends,” 4.13; S. F. Judson, 4.50              8.63
    Bridgman. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                      5.00
    Calumet. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid.
      Talladega C._                                           37.16
    Charlotte. First Cong. Ch.                                20.00
    Detroit. Hon. John S. Newbury, 100; Jas. A.
      McMillan, 100, _for Pastor’s Residence,
      Talladega C._                                          200.00
    Fremont. Cong. Ch.                                         4.25
    Grand Rapids. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rev. J. H.
      H. Sengstacke_                                          20.00
    Hancock. ——, _for Talladega C._                           20.00
    Manistee. Cong. Ch.                                       34.79
    Marble. Mrs. Josephine Barnes                              2.00
    Northport. First Cong. Ch.                                 7.41
    Old Mission. Cong. Ch.                                     6.22
    Olivet. Cong. Ch.                                          5.58
    Pinckney. First Cong. Ch.                                  7.00
    Traverse City. Samuel Anderson                             5.00
    Union City. Dea. Israel W. Clark, _for
      Teacher’s Residence, Talladega C._                     100.00


  IOWA, $419.87.

    Algona. Ladies, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                            4.00
    Atlantic. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Needmore
      Chapel, Talladega C._                                   13.35
    Bowen’s Prairie. Cong. Ch.                                 3.15
    Cedar Falls. “Busy Bees” Cong. Ch., _for
      Needmore Chapel, Talladega C._                          12.00
    Charles City. Ladies of Cong. Ch. _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           10.00
    Danville. Mrs. Harriet Huntington                          6.00
    Davenport. Ladies of Edwards Cong. Ch., _for
      Lady Missionary, New Orleans, La._                      13.45
    Des Moines. Young People of Cong. Ch., by
      Jennie Otis, 57.25; By Mrs. S. G. Otis,
      7.25; Plymouth Cong. Ch., 12; S. J. Otis, 5;
      “Friends,” 5 Bbls. C., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           81.50
    Dubuque. Young People’s Benev. Soc., 25; Young
      Ladies’ Benev. Soc., 25, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           50.00
    Fontanelle. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           10.00
    Grinnell. Ladies, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                           60.35
    Grinnell. Mrs. J. B. Grinnell, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      10.00
    Keokuk. Cong. Ch.                                         48.35
    Lansing. Ladies _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                            3.50
    McGregor. Woman’s Miss’y Soc.                              9.58
    McGregor. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                            8.90
    Miles. Rev. Oliver Emerson                                 2.00
    Muscatine. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid.
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Osage. Cong. Ch.                                          10.44
    Riceville. Ladles, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                            3.00
    Stuart. Mrs. Alice S. F. Kinsey, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      10.75
    Tabor. W. H. M. Soc., _for Lady Missionary,
      New Orleans, La._                                       15.00
    Tabor. Rev. J. Todd                                        0.50
    Waterloo. Ladies Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           10.00
    Watertown. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for Talladega
      C._, 2.05 _for freight_                                  2.05
    West Liberty. Mrs. L. K. Sisson, Box Books,
      _for Library, Macon, Ga._
    Winterset. Mrs. S. J. Dinsmore                            12.00


  WISCONSIN, $184.46.

    Columbus. Calvin Baker                                     5.00
    Elkhorn. Mrs. Harrison, _for Tillotson C. & N.
      Inst._                                                   1.00
    Emerald Grove. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                       9.53
    Fort Atkinson. Mrs. C. B. Snell                           10.00
    Genesee. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          7.08
    Kaukauna. Cong. Ch.                                        7.00
    Kenosha. Thos. Gillespie, M.D.                             5.00
    Madison. First Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. E. H.
      DUDLEY, MRS. FANNY BOWMAN and MRS. L.
      GOODNOW, L. Ms.                                        100.00
    Milwaukee. Grand Ave. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   15.00
    Milwaukee. Mrs. J. M. Sewell and Friends, Box
      Books, etc., _for Macon, Ga._
    Ripon. Cong. Ch., 3 Bbls C., _for Macon, Ga._
    Rosendale. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                15.75
    Viroqua. Cong. Ch.                                         9.10
    Watertown. Rev. G. S. Hubbs, Temperance Chart,
      _for Macon, Ga._


  MINNESOTA, $267.15.

    Detroit. Cong. Ch.                                         2.00
    Freeborn. Cong. Ch.                                        2.00
    Glyndon. Mrs. S. N. Millard, _for Atlanta, Ga._            0.25
    Marshall. Cong. Ch.                                       12.15
    Medford. First Cong. Ch.                                   3.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., 25.81; Second Cong.
      Ch., 1.44                                               27.25
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Straight U._                               60.00
    Minneapolis. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Rushford. Cong Ch.                                         4.00
    Saint Paul. Miss Anna Baker, _for Atlanta, Ga._            2.00
    Spring Valley. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                         3.50
    Tivoli. L. Humiston                                        1.00
    Winona. First Cong. Ch., to const. JAS. M.
      HOLZINGER, L. CORA, DOUD and LOUISA M.
      BASSEY, L. Ms.                                          75.00
    ——. *M.,* _for Talladega C._                              25.00


  MISSOURI, $25.00.

    Cameron. “Friends.”                                        2.00
    Holden. Mrs. S. E. Howe, _for Indian M._                   2.00
    Index. W. B. Wills, 10; P. M. Wills, 5; F. P.
      Moreland, 1                                             16.00
    New Cambria. Cong. Ch.                                     2.00
    Sharon. Cong. Ch.                                          3.00


  KANSAS, $12.00.

    Topeka. Oliver H. Hay, _for Ground, Straight U._          12.00


  NEBRASKA, $219.90.

    Bradshaw. Cong. Ch.                                        2.00
    Buda Flat. German Cong. Ch.                                2.40
    Clarks. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Lincoln. “A Friend of the Colored Race,” _for
      Students preparing for the Ministry_                   200.00
    Lincoln. “K. and C.”                                       6.00
    Wayland. Miss S. P. Locke                                  4.50


  UTAH, $5.00.

    White Rocks. Miss Eliza C. Ayer                            5.00


  MONTANA, $3.00.

    —— “A Friend” by L. N. B.                                  3.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $148.00.

    Washington. First Cong. Ch.                              148.00


  KENTUCKY, $84.00.

    Lexington. Tuition                                        55.50
    Williamsburg. Tuition                                     28.50


  TENNESSEE. $381.15.

    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch., Tuition                          221.90
    Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition                              159.25


  NORTH CAROLINA, $207.05.

    Wilmington. Williston Sch., Tuition                      202.00
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                      5.05


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $315.35.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition, $305.35
      Plymouth Ch., 10                                       315.35


  GEORGIA, $582.26.

    Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition, $212.71; Rent.
      $3; First Cong. Ch., $30                               245.71
    Atlanta. H. Franklin, Coal oil stove, _for
      Atlanta U._
    Hawkinsville. Rev. E. P. Johnson, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        10.00
    Macon. Lewis High Sch. Tuition, 162.30; Cong.
      Ch., 10                                                172.30
    McIntosh. Tuition                                         18.65
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition, 120.25 Rent, 11          131.25
    Woodville. Cong. Ch, 3.35; Rev. J. H. H.
      Sengstacke, 1                                            4.35


  ALABAMA, $354.00.

    Athens. Trinity Sch., Tuition                             49.90
    Marion. Rev. A. W. Curtis, 5.; Cong. Ch. 5;
      Tuition, 8.25                                           18.25
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition, 161.40; Cong.
      Ch., 1                                                 162.40
    Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
    Selma. Cong. Ch.                                           6.95
    Montgomery. Judge John Bruce, _for Student Aid
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Selma. Miss Lunt, _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                      1.50
    Talladega. Cong. Ch.                                      60.00
    Talladega. Cong. Ch. and Soc. 16., Woman’s
      Miss’y. Soc., 15.; Capt. R. H. Isbell, 2.50;
      Wm. Kidd, 1.50, _for Needmore Chapel,
      Talladega C._                                           35.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $145.23.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition, 127.98; Rent,
      10.25; Cong. Ch. 5                                     143.23
    Tougaloo. Miss’y Soc. of Tougaloo U., _for
      Chinese M._                                              2.00


  LOUISIANA, $194.00.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                        169.00
    New Orleans. Prof. W. J. McMurtry, _for
      Student Aid, Straight U._                               25.00


  TEXAS, $333.32.

    Austin. Tillotson C. & N. Inst., Tuition                 331.30
    Paris. Cong. Ch.                                           2.02


  INCOMES, $77.53.

    John Brown Steamer Fund                                   32.65
    Tuthill King Fund, _for Berea C._                         19.33
    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                                16.92
    C. F. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._                         4.48
    Luke Memorial Scholarship Fund                             1.93
    Theological Fund, _for Fisk U._                            1.24
    Yale Library Fund, _for Talladega C._                      0.98
                                                         ----------
      Total for April                                    $28,775.27
      Total from Oct. 1 to April 30                     $151,396.91
                                                        ===========

         *       *       *       *       *

    FOR ARTHINGTON MISSION.

    Income Fund                                              102.95
    Previously acknowledged                                  347.58
                                                         ----------
      Total                                                 $450.53

         *       *       *       *       *

    FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions                                             53.81
    Previously acknowledged                                  537.74
                                                         ----------
      Total                                                 $591.55
                                                         ==========

                                      H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
                                                 56 Reade St., N.Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                PLEASE COPY THIS FORM AND MAIL IT.

                                             _June 1st, 1883._

  _H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., Treasurer,_

                   _56 Reade Street, New York:_

_Enclosed, please find Fifty Cents, subscription for_ THE AMERICAN
MISSIONARY _for the year 1883_.

    _Send the same to the following address:_

        _Sign with your NAME_,

            _Your TOWN_,

                _Your COUNTY_,

                    _And STATE [in full]_.


                 *       *       *       *       *




AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As
closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted
CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its
humane and Christian policy toward the INDIANS.


STATISTICS FOR 1882.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In District of Columbia, 1; Virginia, 1;
North Carolina, 9; South Carolina, 2; Georgia, 14; Kentucky, 7;
Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 14; Kansas, 2; Arkansas, 1; Louisiana, 17;
Mississippi, 5; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 3. _Among the Indians_, 2.
Total, 88.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing number of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

       *       *       *       *       *




PROPOSED CONSTITUTION OF THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.


ART. I. This society shall be called the American Missionary
Association.

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations and diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

ART. III. Members may be constituted for life by the payment of
thirty dollars into the treasury of the Association, with the
written declaration at the time or times of payment that the sum is
to be applied to constitute a designated person a life member; and
such membership shall begin sixty days after the payment shall have
been completed.

Every church which has within a year contributed to the funds of
the Association and every State Conference or Association of such
churches may appoint two delegates to the Annual Meeting of the
Association; such delegates, duly attested by credentials, shall be
members of the Association for the year for which they were thus
appointed.

ART. IV. The Annual Meeting of the Association shall be held in
the month of October or November, at such time and place as may be
designated by the Executive Committee, by notice printed in the
official publication of the Association for the preceding month.

ART. V. The officers of the Association shall be a President,
five Vice-Presidents, a Corresponding Secretary or Secretaries,
a Recording Secretary, a Treasurer, Auditors, and an Executive
Committee of fifteen members, all of whom shall be elected by
ballot.

At the first Annual Meeting after the adoption of this
Constitution, five members of the Executive Committee shall be
elected for the term of one year, five for two years and five for
three years, and at each subsequent Annual Meeting, five members
shall be elected for the full term of three years, and such others
as shall be required to fill vacancies.

ART. VI. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds, the appointing, counseling, sustaining
and dismissing of missionaries and agents, and the selection of
missionary fields. They shall have authority to fill all vacancies
in office occurring between the Annual Meetings; to apply to any
Legislature for acts of incorporation, or conferring corporate
power; to make provision when necessary for disabled missionaries
and for the widows and children of deceased missionaries, and in
general to transact all such business as usually appertains to the
Executive Committees of missionary and other benevolent societies.
The acts of the Committee shall be subject to the revision of the
Annual Meeting.

Five members of the Committee constitute a quorum for transacting
business.

ART. VII. No person shall be made an officer of this Association
who is not a member of some evangelical church.

ART. VIII. Missionary bodies and churches or individuals may
appoint and sustain missionaries of their own, through the agency
of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. IX. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution except by
the vote of two-thirds of the members present at an Annual Meeting,
the amendment having been approved by the vote of a majority at the
previous Annual Meeting.

       *       *       *       *       *




                  [Illustration: COUNT RUMFORD.]

                   HORSFORD’S =ACID PHOSPHATE=.

                             (LIQUID.)

                FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
                     EXHAUSTION, NERVOUSNESS,
                   DIMINISHED VITALITY, URINARY
                        DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

              PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF

             Prof. E. N. Horsford, of Cambridge, Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical
authority of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has
ever been offered to the public which seems to so happily meet the
general want as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free
on application.

                        MANUFACTURED BY THE

                      RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,

                         Providence, R.I.,

                  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           J. & R. LAMB,

                        59 Carmine Street.

                  Sixth Ave. cars pass the door.

                          [Illustration]

                              BANNERS

                             IN SILK,

                           NEW DESIGNS.

                         CHURCH FURNITURE.

                    SEND FOR HAND BOOK BY MAIL.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                   PEARLS      IN THE      MOUTH

                          [Illustration]

                       Beauty and Fragrance

                 Are communicated to the mouth by

                             SOZODONT

which renders the _teeth pearly white_, the gums rosy, and the
_breath sweet_. By those who have used it, it is regarded as an
indispensable adjunct of the toilet. It thoroughly _removes tartar_
from the teeth, without injuring the enamel.

                        SOLD BY DRUGGISTS

                            EVERYWHERE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          VIOLIN OUTFITS

                          [Illustration]

                         Biggest Bargains
                            ever known.

                               From
                               $1.75
                                to
                               $25.

                        ☞ SPECIAL BARGAIN.

                         PAGANINI VIOLIN,

Celebrated for fine tone, finish. Italian strings, fine pegs,
inlaid pearl tail-piece, fine long bow, with ivory and silvered
frog, in violin box. Book of Instruction, with 558 pieces music, by
express for $3.50. Satisfaction guaranteed, or money refunded. A
better outfit cannot be purchased elsewhere for $10. Send stamp for
large Catalogue. G. H. W. BATES & CO., Importers and Manufacturers,
106 Sudbury St., Boston, Mass.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    7 PER CENT. to 8 PER CENT.

                     Interest Net to Investors

                    In First Mortgage Bonds ON

                         IMPROVED FARMS in

                         Iowa, Minnesota

                            and Dakota,

                            SECURED BY

                        ORMSBY BROS. & CO.,

                  BANKERS, LOAN AND LAND BROKERS,

                         EMMETSBURG, IOWA.

                 *       *       *       *       *

          _11 Years’ Experience. Loans Absolutely Safe._

        References and Circulars forwarded on Application.

                 *       *       *       *       *

            _BRANCH BANKS AT MITCHELL AND HURON, D.T._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,

                  FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.

                 *       *       *       *       *

          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”

                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

[Illustration:

  SMITH
  AMERICAN
  ORGANS]

  ARE THE BEST.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at

  BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
  LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
  KANSAS CITY, Mo., 817 Main Street;
  ATLANTA, GA., 27 Whitehall Street;
  Or, DEFIANCE, O.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: THE RISING SUN STOVE POLISH]

  For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil,
  For freeness from dust and slowness to soil,
  And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed,
  And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

  Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
  The half risen sun every package should bear;
  For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use,
  And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             MANHATTAN

                    LIFE INS. CO. OF NEW YORK,

                      _156 and 158 Broadway_.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                        THIRTY-THIRD YEAR.

                 *       *       *       *       *

  DESCRIPTION—One of the oldest, strongest, best.

  POLICIES—Incontestable, non-forfeitable, definite cash
  surrender values.

  RATES—Safe, low, and participating or not, as desired.

  RISKS carefully selected.

  PROMPT, liberal dealing.

GENERAL AGENTS AND CANVASSERS WANTED in desirable territory, to
whom permanent employment and liberal compensation will be given.

Address

  H. STOKES, President.
  H. Y. WEMPLE, Sec’y.
  S. N. STEBBINS, Act’y.
  J. L. HALSEY, 1st V.-P.
  H. B. STOKES, 2d V.-P.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     A TYPE WRITER FOR $1.00.

                          [Illustration]

            FOR FAMILIES, STOREKEEPERS, BOYS AND GIRLS.

This is one of the most ingenious inventions of modern times,
invented and patented by =MR. INGERSOLL=. For =writing letters=,
=addressing envelopes=, =lettering show cards=, =tickets=,
=printing labels= and =circulars=, it has no equal. It will last
a lifetime and is the most useful and fascinating machine ever
invented. Children learn their letters, the arrangement of letters
into words, and words into sentences by its use. As you will see by
the illustration this is no =cheap fraud= with metal type, but is a
well made machine with patent rubber-faced type. It is impossible
to lose the letters or soil your fingers. The ink fountains will
last for months, and can be replenished in one moment with ink
furnished for the purpose. Great taste may be displayed in using
the two colors of ink, as all letters can be inked from either pad.
A letter can be written as perfectly as with a =$50 Type Writer=,
and with little practise =very rapidly=. =Only $1.00= buys this
Machine all complete. Agents wanted to sell it in all parts of the
U.S. Send for sample and terms. Address =E. G. RIDEOUT & CO.=, 10
Barclay St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


=GOLD=EN opportunity for readers of this paper, BOYS AND GIRLS, to
obtain _Pianos_, _Gold Watches_, _Organs_, _etc._, by getting up
clubs for

                        THE GOLDEN ARGOSY,

the great youth’s paper of America. _All the best authors write
for it._ PUBLISHED WEEKLY, =only $1.75 a year=. Trial month’s
subscription, 15 cents; _three months, 45 cents_. Specimen copies
and terms FREE. For particulars address

                       THE GOLDEN ARGOSY, 14 Barclay Street, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  A HANDSOME PRESENT _FOR_
  =$10=.
  AN AMATEUR PHOTO. OUTFIT.
  SEND FOR CIRCULAR TO
  SCOVILL MFG. Co.
  W. IRVING ADAMS      419 Broome St.
  AGENT.                N.Y.

  EDDIE
  &
  CLARA
  AMATEUR
  PHOTOGRAPHERS

GRANDFATHER SITTING FOR HIS PICTURE.]


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  MASON & HAMLIN
  BEST
  ORGANS

  PARIS      VIENNA
  1867        1873

  MATCHLESS UNRIVALED. FRANZ LISZT

  A WONDER TO ALL WHO SEE AND TEST IT.

  PHILAD      MILAN      SANTo
  1876        1881       1875

  THE
  FINER
  DRAWING ROOM
  STYLES
  ARE UNRIVALED.
  ONE TO THREE
  MANUALS;
  TEN TO THIRTY-TWO
  STOPS.
  $200. to $600.
  AND UP.

  POPULAR
  STYLES
  NO 109; SUFFICIENT
  COMPASS FOR FULL PARTS
  OF POPULAR MUSIC
  $22.
  OTHER STYLES:
  $30. $57. $72.
  $78. $93. $108.
  $114. $117. $120 UP
  FOR CASH.
  EASY PAYMENTS
  OR RENTED.

  MUSICIANS GENERALLY REGARD THEM AS
  UNEQUALED. THEO. THOMAS

  CATALOGUES      FREE

  PARIS      PARIS
  1878       1878

  HIGHEST HONORS
  AT ALL THE GREAT WORLD’S EXPOSITIONS
  FOR
  SIXTEEN
  YEARS

  THE TONES COMBINE SO WELL
  WITH THE VOICE. CH. GOUNOUD.

  NO INSTRUMENT SO ENRAPTURES
  THE PLAYER. XAVER SCHARWENKA.

  NORWAY      ONE          SWEDEN
  1878        HUNDRED       1878
              STYLES

  MASON & HAMLIN · ORGAN & PIANO Co
  BOSTON 154 TREMONT ST. NEW YORK, 46 E 14TH ST. CHICAGO, 149 WABASH AVE.]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         BRADBURY PIANOS.

[Illustration:

  BISHOP PECK.          BISHOP HURST.
  REV. J. E. COOKMAN.   DR. JOSEPH CUMMINGS.   CHAPLAIN M. CABE.
  REV. L. HITCHCOCK.    BISHOP SIMPSON.        REV. J. M. WALDEN.
  BISHOP MERRILL.       BISHOP AMES.

“_The Sweetest and Best Toned Piano Made is the Bradbury._”

Dr. TALMAGE says:

“_Friend Smith is a Methodist, but his pianos are all orthodox; you
ought to hear mine talk and sing. It is adapted to morning prayers
or the gayest parties. Should have no faith in sense of a person
who does not like the Bradbury pianos._”

BISHOP SIMPSON says:

“_After a trial in my family for years, for beauty of finish and
workmanship, and splendid quality of tone, your Bradbury piano
cannot be equaled. We are delighted with it._”

=PRESIDENT ARTHUR= _has just ordered two new scale full grand
Bradbury upright pianos, one for the Red Room in Executive Mansion,
where he receives and entertains his friends, and the other for his
house at Soldiers’ Home, Washington, D.C._

  “=Friend Smith=: _Why will you persist in making the
  best piano in the market? Send me one to my home in
  Plainfield. Yours truly_,      =J. H. VINCENT=.”

=Lead the World!= OVER 17,000 IN USE. RECEIVED SEVEN PREMIUMS AND
MEDALS IN FOUR WEEKS.

The best manufactured; warranted for six years. Pianos to let, rent
applied if purchased. Monthly installments received for the same.
Old pianos taken in exchange; cash paid for the same.

The peculiar charm of this piano is its adaptation to the human
voice as an accompaniment, owing to its sympathetic, mellow, yet
rich and powerful singing tones.

DR. C. H. FOWLER, Missionary Secretary, says:

“_I believe you make the best piano in the United States, and
hope you will always win. We are all delighted with ours, and can
cheerfully recommend them._”

_Please send for Price List._

  9 Charles St.,
  Baltimore, Md.

  1103 Penn. Ave.,
  Washington,
  D.C.

  Broadway,
  Saratoga
  Springs,
  N.Y.

  43 Montgomery
  St.,
  Jersey
  City, N.J.

  FREEBORN G. SMITH, 95 Fifth Ave., N.Y.
  FACTORY, Raymond St., Brooklyn.]




Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions silently
corrected. Period spellings and authors’ grammar have been
retained. Inconsistent hyphenation retained due to the multiplicity
of authors. The following printer’s errors were corrected.

Images have been moved outside of paragraphs, causing page numbers
for cuts to be slightly off.

Restored missing “o” in “to” on page 176 (so as to).

Restored missing “f” in “of” on page 181 (any other part of).

Corrected “grmer” to “firmer” on page 181 (firmer in faith).

Restored missing “0” in the Memphis entry on page 187.

Restored missing “5” in the second Wilmington entry on page 187.

Changed “Fragance” to “Fragrance” on page 190 (Beauty and
Fragrance).







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 37, NO. 6, JUNE 1883 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.