[Illustration: AUGUST, 1883.

VOL. XXXVII.

NO. 8

The American Missionary]




CONTENTS


                                                   PAGE.
  EDITORIAL.

    ANNUAL MEETING—THIS NUMBER—VACATION DAYS        225
    CONGREGATIONALISM SOUTH                         226
    GENERAL NOTES                                   228
    BENEFACTIONS                                    230


  THE SOUTH.

    ANNIVERSARY REPORTS—BEREA COLLEGE               231
    ATLANTA UNIVERSITY                              232
    CUT OF ATLANTA UNIVERSITY BUILDINGS             233
    LEWIS HIGH SCHOOL                               234
    AVERY NORMAL INSTITUTE                          236
    BEACH INSTITUTE                                 237
    BREWER NORMAL INSTITUTE                         238
    GOLIAD, TEXAS—FAYETTEVILLE, ARK.                239
    A COTTON PLANTATION (cut)                       240


  THE INDIANS.

    TESTIMONY OF AN INDIAN AGENT                    241


  THE CHINESE.

    MISSION WORK IN MAY                             243


  BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

    NOTES ON MEETINGS OF STATE SOCIETIES            245
    GLEANINGS FROM CORRESPONDENCE                   246
    WORK AT THE DAKOTA MISSION                      247


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    A LITTLE MERCHANT                               248


  RECEIPTS                                          250

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK:
         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,
                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.
          Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y.,
                      as second-class matter.




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


PRESIDENT.

  Hon. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


TREASURER.

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


AUDITORS.

  M. F. READING.
  WM. A. NASH.


EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman; A. P. FOSTER, Secretary; LYMAN
ABBOTT, ALONZO S. BALL, A. S. BARNES, C. T. CHRISTENSEN, FRANKLIN
FAIRBANKS, CLINTON B. FISK, S. B. HALLIDAY, SAMUEL HOLMES, CHARLES
A. HULL, SAMUEL S. MARPLES, CHARLES L. MEAD, WM. H. WARD, A. L.
WILLISTON.


DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

  Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D., _Boston_.
  Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.
  Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to
the Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting
fields, to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of
the “American Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New
York Office; letters for the Bureau of Woman’s Work, to Miss D. E.
Emerson, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association,’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ESTEY ORGAN

  J. ESTEY & CO
  Brattleboro Vt.]

As musical culture increases it demands in musical instruments for
home, church, or school, excellence in tone, tasteful workmanship,
and durability.

                  SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

            VOL. XXXVII.      AUGUST, 1883.      No. 8.

                 *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

The thirty-seventh Annual Meeting of the American Missionary
Association will be held in the Central Congregational Church,
Brooklyn, New York (Dr. A. J. F. Behrends’), commencing Tuesday,
October 30, at 3 o’clock P.M. Rev. J. L. Withrow, D.D., of Boston,
will preach the sermon. Other addresses and papers, and also
arrangements relating to the meeting, will be announced hereafter.

       *       *       *       *       *

We give in this number of the MISSIONARY additional reports of
eight of our educational institutions, and also a cut of the
college buildings of Atlanta University. The new Stone hall, which
is the centre building, is 124 feet in length, three stories
high, with a basement, and contains president’s and treasurer’s
offices, class rooms, Graves library room, chapel, which will seat
comfortably 400, besides lecture rooms, dormitory room, etc., etc.

       *       *       *       *       *


VACATION DAYS.

By the time this issue of the _Missionary_ reaches our readers,
a large number of those in the service of this Association
will be enjoying a season of needed rest. As the climate South
is enervating to those who have been raised at the North, it
is essential that our missionaries working in that portion of
the country return every year or two to their former homes and
associations for recuperation and courage for future work. Many
of them need also contact with Northern society to refresh their
hearts and minds, and to gain a stimulus not imparted by the circle
of acquaintances found on the Southern field. These visits North
afford opportunities for our workers to make known the wants of
the people with whom they labor, and to show the deep interest
they take in their welfare, and the sacrifices they are willing
to make in their behalf. The return of a missionary to the church
from which he or she went forth, often gives a spiritual uplift to
the whole congregation. We are happy to recognize the willingness
manifested by pastors, by Sabbath-schools and by local missionary
societies, to afford these returned missionaries the privilege
of explaining the needs of their work and of enlisting a deeper
sympathy for it. We wish, however, to make it known that these
missionaries greatly appreciate kindly attention. Many of them have
felt the want of it on the Southern field, and sometimes on their
return after protracted absence receive it with glad surprise.
We are sure that if those with whom they meet will be forward to
express their pleasure in seeing them and their interest in their
sacrifices and success, they will find that the little effort
put forth to give cheer will go a long ways in strengthening the
heart, and adding to the ability of the missionary to do more
valiantly the work of Christian patriotism in which he is engaged.
Invitations to literary and social circles, as well as to more
strictly religious meetings, will almost always be grateful to
the tired worker, and we are very sure that the information, the
unconscious influence, imparted by the missionary, as well as the
satisfaction in having done a good and kindly service, will amply
repay for any effort Christian friends may make to render the
missionary’s vacation agreeable and profitable.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONGREGATIONALISM SOUTH.

RY REV. J. E. ROY, D.D.

When the American Missionary Association went “down toward the
South,” Congregationalism was hated by the ruling class, as coming
from the hot-bed of New Englandism, and was absolutely unknown
among the people to whom the Northern evangelism then had access,
and even on their part, as a system, it had yet to encounter the
densest opposition which ignorance, superstition and sectarianism
could combine. And when, like John the Baptist, it laid the ax at
the root of the tree, demanding morality as well as pietism, it
confronted the momentum of generations of pagan vice confirmed
by the indurations of the system of slavery. In order to get any
foothold on this basis, it has to begin with the spelling-book, as
the key to the incarcerated Bible. But the hunger for letters, for
ideas, forced a way into the word of God. Schools followed the army
across the Southland. Revivals, like the Northern clover, sprang up
in the same track. Every teacher, by his or her vow, entered into
with the A. M. A., became a missionary.

Talk about women’s work for women. Here, for a score of years, have
been from 150 to 200 gifted consecrated women, of whom the world
was not worthy, sacrificing youth and beauty, going for a time into
places where men could not stand, with their names cast out as
vile, yet lifting up their lowly sisters and starting scores and
scores of young men on into a religious life and into the ministry
of the Lord Jesus. As converts multiplied, many of them took to the
old churches, and not a few desired to have the way which their
dear teachers represented. And so, gradually there came on these
churches, each one a miniature republic, and each, in almost every
case, an outcome of the school process.

In that early time, not a few of the best tried friends of the
Association grew uneasy at the slow progress of the church work,
only in late years to admire the wisdom of the administration in
not picking the pear before it was ripe. The M. E. church going
South had only to open its doors to receive 200,000 of the old-time
Methodists, with their clinging immoralities and their corrupting
ministers. Grandly has that patriotic church wrestled with its
problem. But ours has been a call to a different task.

In five years after the close of the war, besides the three
John G. Fee churches in Kentucky, which had flung themselves
upon the serried ranks of the slaveholders, compelling a vast
region to behold what sort of stuff this Puritanism was made
of, the Association numbered _eleven_ churches among the sable
brethren, whose teachers and preachers usually joined with them
in fellowship. In ten years these had come to number _forty_. And
now, eighteen years after the war, the total is _eighty-nine_, an
average of five for each year. Nor are these merely nominal or
skeleton churches. Their average membership is _sixty-five_, while
that of all our churches west of the Mississippi is _thirty-five_.
Nearly every one has its own place of worship and its own pastor.
Their own ministers have had to be grown, converted and trained
up from the alphabet, while multitudes have been prepared in our
schools for service in the old-time churches, the small number
that we have taken (a half hundred, besides several foreign
missionaries) serving only as the toll for grinding the grists. A
high wisdom was that which was displayed by the early workers in
seizing upon the strategic points, so that one can now hardly go to
a principal city of the South without finding there a fully-working
Congregational church, such as those at Washington, Hampton,
Charleston, Raleigh, Savannah, Macon, Atlanta, Mobile, Montgomery,
Birmingham, Meridian, Jackson, New Orleans, Austin, Little Rock,
Memphis, Nashville, Chattanooga, Knoxville, and Louisville. So it
seems that this work has gone on in every State of the South, for
in Florida, which might seem an exception, the noted church at
Jacksonville was organized by one of the actuaries of the A. M. A.,
and nourished by another. Nor have these churches been left to the
weakness of an isolated independence. For the better training of
them, and for the consolidating of their strength, they have been
organized into regular State associations, which have sought to
introduce the methods of the North, which in their varied services
often come to an intellectual and spiritual glow that astonishes
us, and which come to a consciousness of their national fellowship
when they each elect their delegates to the annual meeting of the
A. M. A., and to the National Council, one of their own members
having served at the last triennial as an assistant moderator.
These State bodies now number _eight_, which nearly cover the
whole South. So, then, the physical geography of the land is quite
well mapped out, Congregationally. There remains much space for
filling.

No view of the Congregationalism taken into the South by the A. M.
A. will be complete without considering the pervasive influence
of all of these churches and institutions of learning, that have
come to be a power universally recognized. Almost every member
going forth from them is, in some sense, a representative of the
Congregational idea, though he does not himself take the name.
In all the South, among the whites as well as the blacks, these
principles have been made known, so that the way, in great part, is
prepared for carrying on there a spiritual propagandism that shall
yet recognize the essential feature of this past dispensation,
which, at the North, has been up-borne by sympathy and prayer, the
consecration of substance and the offering of sons and daughters,
and which, at the South, has bravely stood, this score of years,
for this sublime act and testimony, in sacrifice enduring hardness,
ostracism and scorn, viz., the features of the brotherhood of
man in Christ Jesus, the real unity of all Christian believers,
irrespective of race, color, or social condition.

                                            THE CONGREGATIONALIST.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


AFRICA.

—The French government will shortly submit to the Chamber a project
for the construction of a railroad from Soukarras to Tebessa.

—Dr. Schweinfurth will soon come to Halle to confer with Dr.
Riebeck upon the results of their exploration of Sokotora.

—The English missionaries sent to reinforce the station of Roubaga
have all been detained by the fever at Msalala to the south of
Victoria Nyanza.

—P. Livinhac, who for five years has directed the station of
Roubaga, has been appointed apostolic vicar of Victoria Nyanza.

—According to a communication from Rohlfs to the Geographical
Society of Berlin, Dr. Stecker has vainly attempted to traverse the
Gallas country and will return to Europe.

—Mr. Herisson has reported from his new archæological exploration
in Tunis, two grand mosaics from Carthage, the most beautiful that
have as yet been found in Africa.

—Hicks Pasha has defeated over 5,000 Arabs in the Soudan, killing
500. The Arabs fight bravely, but their spears are useless against
shells and cannon. The Egyptian loss was two killed.

—Captain Casati has traversed the country of the Niams-Niams,
following several routes not frequented as yet by European
travelers. He has encountered great dangers, was detained a
prisoner for two months in the house of Prince Azanga, and only
rescued himself from his captivity by flight.

—The Wesleyan missions on the West Coast of Africa in Sierra Leone,
Gold Coast, Yomba, Popo and Gambia have contributed about $150,000
in the last ten years. The number in church fellowship is 15,044;
in attendance on public worship, 53,474.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INDIANS.

—The Indian School at Carlisle has 137 acres of wheat, from which
about 600 barrels of flour will be made for the use of the boarding
department.

—There are Indian girls in the Indian Territory University who
are studying German, French, Latin, and Greek, geology, moral
philosophy, political economy and other branches of the College
course.

—The Indian Mission of the Methodists in the Indian Territory is
organized into a conference with four presiding elder’s districts
and twenty-nine pastoral charges. There are 112 local preachers,
1,100 white members, 30 colored members, 5,107 Indian members, 58
Sunday Schools with 1,602 scholars.

—The Presbyterians have arranged to establish next September a
boarding school among the Creek Indians where they have never been
reached by Christian influences.

—The capacity of Indian children for learning English is shown by
the fact that at Carlisle quite a number who came in August without
knowing the language were able to converse in it the next May.

—It is said that the Indians of Alaska do not belong to the same
race as the North American Indians, but they are probably an
offshoot from Japanese Coreans. The missionaries who have been
laboring among them say that in many respects their conceptions of
moral law are better than those of civilized nations.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CHINESE.

—There are Chinese Baptist churches in Guiana, South America.

—The English Presbyterian Synod Missionary Society, having its
field of labor principally in China, reported for last year an
income of $425,000.

—The Trinity Baptist Church of New York has twelve Chinamen among
its members. At the baptism of J. Sing recently, some twenty other
Chinamen were present. One of these converts, Kun Sing, is about to
go as a missionary to his countrymen in Canton, China.

—A number of Japanese have prepared a formal paper, asking that in
the work of translating the Old Testament the Japanese Christians
may be represented by a committee of their own countrymen, selected
by themselves.

—The Stockton (Cal.) _Herald_ gives the following account of a
Chinese bride: The other afternoon a strange procession of hacks,
with gay colors flying, with a scent of burning spices about them,
drew up at the shed of the California Steam Navigation Company,
where the steamer Mary Garratt was loading. In the first hack was
a lone female, with her head in a bundle of bright-colored Chinese
silk, which concealed every feature. Behind was another hack, in
which several Chinese boys rode, each carrying a burning taper.
Then came two more hacks, each filled with Chinese women. All
alighted at the wharf, and the hooded woman was assisted out and
led on board the steamer, her course being conducted by the boys
with the lighted tapers and the women. The woman was so closely
veiled as to be practically blindfolded. Then it was ascertained
that she was a daughter of “Sonora George,” and was going to
Bedouin Island to be married.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

Mr. Deering has given $50,000 to the Northwestern University of the
Methodists at Evanston, Illinois.

Mr. John C. Phillips has given $25,000 for the further endowment of
Phillips Exeter Academy.

Wm. H. Vanderbilt has added $100,000 to the endowment fund of
Vanderbilt University.

Lafayette College has received from Mr. T. W. McWilliams of New
York a contribution of $10,000 toward the endowment of the March
Chair of Philology.

Mr. J. H. Cassedy of Thiells, N.Y., has given $5,000 to Talladega
College for a model school building, to bear his name.

Miss Susie Bartlett of Oshkosh, Wis. has given $500 to Beloit
College for the purchase of scientific books.

By the will of Amasa Stone, Adelbert College is to receive $100,000
in addition to the half million given during his lifetime.

The Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute of Troy, N.Y. has received
from Mrs. Wm. Howard Harts, as a memorial of her late husband,
$60,000 to endow a professorship to bear his name.

Mrs. Dr. Griffin of Troy, N.Y., a former preceptress at Cazenovia
Seminary, has given $5,000 to that institution.

Oberlin College has received $5,000 from Miss Sturges of Mansfield,
Ohio, for a new building for the use of ladies’ societies, to be
called Sturges Hall.

By the will of Lucy O. Bowditch, late of Boston, a bequest of
$5,000 is made to the industrial school for girls, at Dorchester,
to be added to the permanent fund, the income to be applied to
paying the expenses of the school.

_Endowments for the Christian education of the coming generations
are the best bulwarks of our free institutions._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SOUTH.

REV. JOSEPH E. ROY, D.D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT.

PROF. ALBERT SALISBURY, SUPERINTENDENT OF EDUCATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNIVERSARY REPORTS.

       *       *       *       *       *


BEREA COLLEGE.

Prof. W. E. C. Wright.

The seventeenth year of Berea College closed on June 30th with
most satisfactory marks of the sustained usefulness and increasing
importance of the school.

The Commencement festival really began with the joint exhibition
of the Ladies’ Literary and Phi Delta Societies on Friday evening,
before a large audience, in the chapel. The pupils of the lower
schools gave their interesting exhibitions in the same place on
Saturday evening. President Fairchild’s baccalaureate discourse on
Sunday morning was a vigorous and comprehensive rehearsal of the
religious and moral ideas of consecration to God and love toward
all men, which this college has ever sought to impress on its
students; his text, Phil. iv., 9, “Those things, which ye have both
learned and received and heard and seen in me, do.” No Christian
man could have heard it without feeling how supremely important
for the educational regeneration of the South is such a spirit of
religious earnestness.

On Tuesday evening the Literary Societies were addressed on the
subject of “Progress,” by Col. Swope, who is the Internal Revenue
Collector for this district, and a native of Kentucky.

On Wednesday came the final exercises, which gathered a great
multitude from mountain and from plain. The season has been very
rainy, but this was the most perfect of June days—its unclouded
sun tempered by a cool breeze from the south. Soon after sunrise
vehicles of every description, and saddle-horses carrying one, two
or three passengers, began to pour in toward the Tabernacle, most
visitors bringing luncheon for a noon-time picnic in the oak grove.

Besides the three graduates—one from the classical, and two from
the scientific course—fourteen other students from the higher
classes presented orations or essays. All were listened to by the
great audience with interest, and some with enthusiasm. In the
afternoon nearly as many gathered again to hear a most suggestive
and interesting address from Rev. R. T. Hall, of Mount Vernon,
Ohio, on “The Abuse of Liberty.” Short addresses followed from Rev.
Mr. Simmons of the (colored Baptist) Bible Institute of Louisville,
and Rev. Mr. Barnett, a Methodist minister from College Hill.

It suggests the interest of our neighbors in the work of Berea
that the Kentucky _Register_, published at the county seat and
a representative paper of the Kentucky aristocracy, gave nearly
a column the next day to a strongly commendatory notice of the
exercises. A gentleman of a well-known old Kentucky family
passing this way toward the mountains turned aside to see what
the Commencement was like, and spent the day in such unexpected
approval of what he saw and heard that he declared at night that he
might be set down hereafter as for Berea every time. This is the
more noticeable as the appearance of blacks and whites in about
equal numbers and with entirely equal respect on the same platform
must at first have given a great shock to his Southern prejudices.

A Northern visitor, remarking on the perfect pronunciation of the
speakers, said, “A blind man could not tell to which race the
several speakers belong.” The “color blindness” which still keeps
the students of Berea about equally divided between the two races
is one of the most important elements in its work for reducing the
illiteracy of Kentucky (28 per cent. of the voters and almost as
much of it white as black), and settling the problems the nation
has inherited from slavery.

       *       *       *       *       *


ATLANTA UNIVERSITY.

PROF. THOS. N. CHASE.

Our annual examinations are made interesting and exciting by the
presence of visitors appointed by the Governor, who this year,
as usual, attended the three days of examination and one day of
literary exercises.

The grades were examined in South Hall and the normal preparatory
and college classes in the new Stone Hall. Some of the visitors
evidently thought the interior of Stone Hall most too fine for
poor students, and so we often felt moved to call attention to the
simplicity of its construction, and the fact that good Boston desks
do not cost much more than the very cheapest kind.

On each day quite a large number of spectators was present.

While numerous complimentary remarks were made we do not think
that some features of the school were fully appreciated. Latin,
Greek, higher mathematics and metaphysics still possess a charm for
scholars, both South and North, while modern methods in the lower
grades attract the attention and win the admiration of only an
appreciative few.

The specimens of map drawing and of original designs in industrial
drawing were considered good by competent judges.

For several years a large part of the public have had object
lessons from nature and in form of a daily exercise, with especial
reference to teaching them to make simple and exact statements in
clear and correct language; and in their examinations they were
said to show marked ability in making nice distinctions and using
good English.

The experiment of the senior normal girls in cottage housekeeping
under the direction of one of the teachers meets with universal
favor. Everybody in these United States thinks every girl ought to
know how to keep house well, and the best way to learn how to do a
thing is to do it. The outcome of the work in this department is
highly satisfactory, and we wish we had a larger cottage for next
year.

The silk culture has been worth the while for the sake of the
entertainment and instruction it has afforded, even if no pecuniary
benefit came from it. The worms “wound up” their business, at about
the same time the rest of us did ours, and everybody said “Well
done.”

The competitive gardens formed another feature in our work. These
were a rod square and thirty-six in number. Beets, beans, peas,
potatoes and onions were the crops. The potatoes were dug on the
last day of examination, and it was found that our native African
had gained the first prize, having 82½ pounds on his square rod.
How about slavery’s developing the African race?

As the visitors inspected the new barn, the twelve full kits of
carpenters’ tools donated by a friend in New York City, though
still unused, were not concealed from view. Funds for a shop have
now been pledged, and a teacher of carpentering is to be employed,
even if some other department is suspended, and the boys are to be
taught the use of tools, in obedience to the prevailing sentiment
of what ought to be, and in the hope that such instruction will
help the colored man to hold his present position in the mechanical
field.

[Illustration: ATLANTA UNIVERSITY BUILDINGS.]

On Commencement day “everything passed off well,” and a clergyman
from Boston was heard to say, “Good thoughts well expressed.”
Sixteen young men and women received diplomas or certificates, and
listened to parting words from the president.

Governor McDaniel honored us with his presence, and sent a verbal
message to the graduates, saying that he had been much pleased with
their exercises and felt a warm interest in them.

At the alumni meeting an excellent paper was read by an alumnus
upon the subject of industrial education, and several speeches were
made, showing intellectual growth and telling of good work done.

Within ten days from Commencement, as many as three-fourths of
our students will be scattered all over the State, and in many
places in neighboring States, metamorphosed into dignified and
wise pedagogues. May they all meet with great success in their
day-school, Sunday-school and temperance work, and in their efforts
to stimulate the people to acquire property and make for themselves
pleasant and pure homes.

We were glad to have with us Prest. De Forest and Prof. Ellis, of
Talladega College, the former of whom preached the baccalaureate
sermon, that abounded in gems of deep and practical thought,
incased in clear and transparent language.

At the meeting of the Board of Trustees, Sec’y Strieby was
re-elected, and one of Atlanta’s most prominent men in business,
social and religious circles, who had recently declined the office
of Mayor, consented to become a member of the Board. Resolutions
were passed, thanking Messrs. King, Cassedy and Sessions, and the
representatives of the late Hon. W. E. Dodge, for gifts to the
school.

Crowded halls, continued success in old lines of work, and
encouragement in new, added buildings, generous gifts, growing
favor among the people, good reports from graduates and the
constant presence of the Divine Spirit lead us to thank God and
take courage, believing that the school is accomplishing its
mission in the main, and that the financial clouds that lower will
be dispelled in due time, as others have been in the history of the
institution.

       *       *       *       *       *


LEWIS HIGH SCHOOL, MACON, GA.

A missionary villa, picturesque and interesting, is comprised of
the Lewis High School, Church, Library Building and Teachers’ Home,
occupying the summit of a beautiful street in Upper-Central Macon.
The Anniversary exercises were inaugurated on Sunday evening, May
27, with a lecture by Hon. Walter B. Hill, a lawyer of Macon,
who, in urgent language worthy of his profession, argued that
ignorance is the cause of the faults of those partially educated.
His subject, therefore, named the remedy, Christian education.
In closing, the speaker said he had searched for and chosen the
best poem for the conclusion of his address, the author of which
was the worthy pastor of the church, Rev. Stanley E. Lathrop—“The
Rain-Drop’s Lesson”—ending with the lines:

    “Never tempted
      Work to stop
    Though my cup hold
      But a drop.
    Rising Heavenward,
      Pure to grow,
    Coming earthward,
      Joy to sow!”

Rev. J. W. Burke, a prominent Southern Methodist clergyman, of
Macon, in earnest and well-chosen words, corroborated Mr. Hill’s
arguments.

The examinations began on Tuesday, culminating in an exhibition on
Thursday. Prof. W. A. Hodge, principal, examined the classes, with
four lady helpers, who would take high stand in our best Northern
schools, in their several departments. There have been 298 pupils
enrolled, an increase of fifty per cent. As we listened to the
highly creditable results we learned better how to teach, and were
filled with equal regard for the field which is “white already,”
and for those laborers whom the Lord of the vineyard, through the
A. M. A., has sent forth into His harvest.

The work of adding to knowledge, understanding, requires patient
toil here, yet we learned from the assistant principal, Miss
Lindsley, who has taught in four States, that she has never before
accorded the highest mark (100) to two scholars, in any one
school, for deportment and scholarship. Miss Sprague, teacher of
the Intermediate Department, has shown good results in the common
English branches and declamation, and has a bright, stimulating way
of interesting her pupils. Miss Pingree has won in a few months the
love of the primary class so heartily, that two of them meeting
a visitor, a stranger in this city, anxiously inquired, “Do you
think Miss Pingree will come back?” Her success as a missionary
has led her to feel called to that work; and could such a need
here be filled, the A. M. A. have one who is already beloved among
this people in such capacity whose labors have been voluntarily
given outside of school hours. All the teachers seek to know their
pupils in their homes, taking long walks “without the camp.” We
wish that a missionary horse and carriage could be an auxiliary!
Miss Woodworth has developed the music to an astonishing degree.
They have performed a cantata, sing accurately in difficult parts,
and the primary class reminded us of a full band of music! These
teachers are much beloved, and the young women of the school gave
them a surprise party at the Home, furnishing ice cream and cake.
This was a voluntary certificate of esteem.

The Exhibition Day filled the church with an audience of 400.
We noticed in the dialogues an apparent enjoyment, evincing the
imitative faculty and love for diversion. In these they seemed
to feel at home. The exercises were listened to with unbroken
attention throughout. The last feature of the occasion was the
presentation of a Wheeler & Wilson sewing machine, costing $65
(through the Macon agent, Judge M. R. Freeman), awarded by the
company to the girl who produced the best work; five machines
having been furnished during the winter for practice. Mrs. D. W.
Job, daughter of the late Rev. Nehemiah Adams, D.D., of Boston, in
the name of Mrs. Lathrop and Mrs. Hodge whom she called the “Woman
in Proverbs,” and “Dorcas”—told the story of the sewing school and
awarded the machine.

For three years Mrs. Lathrop, the worthy “minister’s wife,” has met
nearly every week with girls to teach them to sew. They have made
about 500 garments, and one of their patch-work quilts has been
given to the oldest scholar, _aged_ 93! Ten competed for the prize.
Mrs. Prof. Hodge, matron of the Teachers’ Home, has assisted this
winter in this benevolent and important work.

Prof. Hodge, with some earnest words of fitting counsel, presented
certificates of graduation to the senior class of three boys and
four girls.

After a beautiful chorus, all were invited to adjourn to the
dedication of a gem of a building, which we will call “The
Emerald,” in chaste tints of green and olive, set in the rear of
the grounds on the brow of the hill. This might be appropriately
termed “The Lathrop Library,” for the pastor in the last two years
has collected the books and the money which now constitute a public
library for the colored people and their friends.

The building cost $350, and contains about 3,600 volumes, and
is furnished with book-cases, chairs, table and a cabinet. What
publishers or friends will now supply magazines and papers,
imparting religious instruction and profitable information? The
lower story, it is hoped, will be converted into a workshop, where
trades may be taught. Money will be needed for this.

The evening was devoted to a concert, conducted by Miss Woodworth.
We recognized one of the best and most difficult Harvard songs, nor
could the Glee Club sing it with better expression.

In social, educational, moral and religious growth, this year’s
work of the A. M. A. in Macon cannot be estimated. God bless the
North! God bless the South! God bless the colored people of Macon,
and cause His face to shine upon them all.

  BOSTON, Mass.                                        D. W. J.

       *       *       *       *       *


AVERY NORMAL INSTITUTE, CHARLESTON, S.C.

PROF. A. W. FARNHAM.

Our Commencement exercises began with the sermon, Sunday, June
24, which was preached by Rev. Prof. A. G. Townsend, of Claflin
University. The following, with reference to the sermon, is from
the _News and Courier_:

“The sermon to the graduating class at Avery Institute was
delivered last evening at 6 o’clock to a full audience by the Rev.
Professor A. G. Townsend, of Claflin University, who is also an
alumnus of Avery. After a brief salutation to old and new friends,
which was conceived in good taste and just feeling, the preacher
announced his text, Prov. iv., 13: ‘Take fast hold of instruction;
let her not go; keep her, for she is thy life.’ The discourse was
straightforward and of substantial interest.”

Monday, June 25, was “Children’s Day.” This day, organized by the
present Principal seven years ago, has become almost as popular as
“Graduation Day.” The leading features this year were selections
from the Kitchen-Garden exercises, as taught by Miss Huntington
of New York, and the exhibit of two quilts, a rug, and a quantity
of holders, which were made by the children. In these exercises
and the use of the needle, the boys have engaged as heartily and
successfully as the girls. This industrial showing was enlivened
with singing, several recitations, a dialogue, and two class
readings. “Children’s Day” is given to the primary and intermediate
classes. To these classes have been devoted two hours a week for
industrial work.

The grammar school exhibition occurred June 26. The 1st years gave
Miss Andrews’ geographical play of the “United States,” and a
dialogue, in a manner that reflected credit upon their teacher, who
had prepared them. The 2d years gave two class readings (a scene
from “William Tell” and “The Charcoal Man”); and the 3rd years
gave the comic opera of “King Alfred.” The industrial work of this
department has been confined to inventive and perspective drawing.
In inventive drawing the pupils made their designs with sticks,
first of equal then of unequal lengths, and when these designs were
accepted by the teacher they were drawn first on slates, then in
drawing books.

On Graduation Day, June 29, six young men and the same number of
young women read essays. Their subjects were: “Our Common School
Law,” “After Graduation, What?” “Chemistry of Common Things,” “The
Relation of Geography to Other Sciences,” “The Action of Alcohol on
the Body and Mind,” “Water,” “Why Do You Use Tobacco?” “Industrial
Education,” “Should Cooks be Educated?” “Physical Culture,” “Heat,”
and “Some Evidences of Christianity.” This class chose for its
motto, “Nothing great is lightly won.” The young men all intend to
go to college.

The results of the industrial work in the normal department were
a surprise to all on account of the quantity, variety and beauty
of the work displayed. It consisted of colored designs for dadoes,
borders and embroidery; useful and ornamental articles of scroll
sawing; leaves, animals, vases, a bust and other articles modeled
in artists’ clay; samples of printing, including the commencement
programmes, and a fine display of crochet and art needlework. An
average of an hour a week was given to the industrial work in the
normal department.

The music, both vocal and instrumental, on each occasion, was good.
Special mention should be made of “Inflammatus,” from “Stabat
Mater,” which was well given and well received. Bible recitations
by classes took the place of Bible readings in the devotional
exercises of each day. On graduation day the graduating class
recited the 12th chapter of Ecclesiastes.

On July 4th the Avery Alumni Association meets, has literary
exercises, a business meeting, and gives a $50 cash prize to
that member of the class of ’83 who has the best record; its
members exchange greeting, vow new devotion to their _Alma Mater_,
pronounce a benediction upon her, and then go their ways for
another year of honest work in behalf of less favored humanity.

Referring to our visitors the _New Era_ has the following:

“During the exercises of the week, a number of prominent white
citizens were in attendance and evinced genuine interest in the
proceedings. It is very gratifying to see this attention on the
part of the white element. It betokens a hopeful outlook. And why
should there not be the pleasantest relations between all good
citizens? We are all destined to dwell together. The quicker, under
reasonable progress, that the past is forgotten, the better for
all. We are sincerely glad that Prof. Farnham gives cordial welcome
to all who are interested in the work in which he so intelligently
and sincerely engages his intellectual and moral forces.”

       *       *       *       *       *


BEACH INSTITUTE.

MISS IDA M. BEACH.

For weeks we had looked forward to these last hours! And now all is
over!

Four days of written examinations were very tiresome, but I wish
my readers could have seen the earnest workers. Oral examinations
occurred on Friday, May 25. A pleasant hour could be spent in the
Primary Department. Here are little folks reading now so smoothly
in First Reader, who eight months ago knew nothing of A B C work.

Words never seen before are placed on the board with diacritical
marks. The little hands come up, and the correct pronunciation is
given. In another room pupils are engaged in writing a spelling
lesson. Examined slates prove that attention has been given to
careful instruction.

Hurrying on, we find older pupils reciting in arithmetic and
geography; others, more advanced, in algebra and literature. The
same earnest spirit fills each room, and all seem striving to do
their best.

On Sunday evening, in the Congregational Church, Rev. Dana Sherrill
preached a sermon to the members of the graduating class, taking
for his text Phil. iii., 13, 14. Gathering up the lessons learned,
but forgetting past attainments, they should be ever striving for
something better beyond. The kind, practical counsel found, at
least, attentive listeners. Said one graduate: “That was our New
Year’s motto. I shall never forget it now.”

A new feature of our anniversary exercises was a juvenile concert.
On Monday night a goodly company gathered in our chapel. One
hundred and forty children greeted them with a song. The choruses
were rendered with enthusiasm. Of particular interest were the
solos and action songs by the little Primaries. A solo, “I’se
gwine to Alabama,” given by one of the older boys, was thoroughly
enjoyed. The net sum of $32.00 was raised for the increase of our
library fund.

It was interesting to watch the delighted parents during the
sociability of the “breaking up.”

Wednesday came, with clouds in the morning, and at the hour
appointed for the public exercises, rain falling in torrents. Yet
nearly every child was in place, and extra chairs were brought for
the gathered spectators. The exercises consisted of recitations,
dialogues and songs. As the children performed the parts assigned
each, I did not wonder that both teachers and mothers “felt proud.”
An invitation to examine work done by members of the sewing class
was generally accepted, giving the happy parents fresh cause for
pride.

We decided to hold our graduating exercises on Wednesday evening.
At an early hour every seat was taken, while numbers were standing
in the aisles and halls. Girls in pretty white dresses and boys
in fresh spring suits, march in and take seats reserved. A sweet
song by the girls opened the exercises. Prayer was offered and
the Lord’s Prayer chanted. Reading, declamations and recitations
followed. Conversation between several girls concerning their plans
for life brought “sincerity,” a fairy, into their midst. Her waving
banner proclaimed to each the simple words, “Be true.”

The graduates read their essays and received their diplomas,
accompanied by kind words from the Superintendent. Mr. S., rising,
called to him a boy of fifteen years and said: “A scholarship
was offered to the one who should excel in general scholarship,
punctuality and deportment. I hold in my hand a paper stating that
you, having done this, are entitled to the same.” Amid hearty
applause the gift was received with smiles and thanks.

A few words from Mr. Callen, a colored preacher, and one of our
pupils; a parting song, a gathering in the school-room for the
“good-night,” and then we said good-by.

       *       *       *       *       *


BREWER NORMAL INSTITUTE.

REV. L. C. JOELL.

Greenwood is located at the junction of the Augusta & Knoxville
Railroad with the Columbia & Greenville. The town is one of the
prettiest in the upper part of South Carolina. With a population
of one thousand, with one hotel, four white schools, two colored
schools and several churches, a newspaper and other evidences
of thrift, it offers an attractive locality to settlers, and
especially as its climate is very healthful. The eleventh
anniversary of the Brewer Normal School, which is located in this
town, was observed June 28. This always creates a profound interest
in the vicinity, and long before the hour of commencing, an
anxious throng of every imaginable description of vehicle is seen
wending its way thitherward. On Sunday the 24th, a special sermon
was preached to the students and a large number of friends, from
Galatians 5:9.

The exercises on the closing day were attended by an unusually
large number of citizens and visitors from far and near. The
students in attendance during the sessions were 157, an advance
upon that of any previous year. The programme of the day was
inviting. The principal, Mr. J. D. Backenstose, presided; vocal
and instrumental music for the occasion was supplied by Mrs. W.
W. Frazier, formerly Miss Mary Clark of Fisk University, and the
trained classes of the school. Rev. E. W. Williams of the Second
Pres. Church in Abbeville gave the address, taking for his subject
“Reality in Morals, in Education and in Christianity.” It enlisted
earnest attention during the hour consumed in its delivery. At the
intermission between the morning and evening sessions, friends held
fellowship with friends and betook themselves to the contents of
abundantly laden refreshment baskets. Everybody seemed to manifest
that the lines had fallen to him in pleasant places.

The afternoon exercises consisted of singing, recitations and
dialogues from the little ones of the primary department.
The evening was occupied with similar exercises by the older
students of the school. The audience room was by far too small to
accommodate the immense throng seeking admission. The year’s work
has been a grand success.

       *       *       *       *       *


GOLIAD, TEXAS.

BY MR. J. R. S. HALLOWAY.

School closed here on the 31st of May with an examination and
exhibition. The house was packed to its utmost. Prominent white
people of Goliad were in attendance, and returned home surprised
and astonished, exclaiming “We saw more than we came to see. We
had no idea that the Congregational school could come up to this.
That anthem ‘Strike the Cymbals’ sung by the teacher and school
was splendid. We would advise all those who are sending their
children to this school to continue.” Goliad is acknowledged to
be the greatest educational centre in western Texas. The prospect
of building up a good school here is seventy-five per cent
better than it was a month ago. There is an educational society
instituted about a year ago which is doing all in its power for
the advancement of the school, and we look forward to the day when
the much needed school building will be provided. We are about to
organize a Band of Hope.

       *       *       *       *       *


HENDERSON SCHOOL, FAYETTEVILLE, ARK.

BY MRS. H. D. FOSTER.

The Henderson School closed its first year of nine months with
examinations Thursday, May 24th. A large number of interested
parents and friends came in to inquire and see for themselves what
their children had been doing for the year. After listening to
various recitations and exercises, they expressed themselves highly
pleased.

Thursday evening the annual exhibition came off, and about 400 were
present. At half past eight o’clock, the pupils marched into the
primary room. They made a grand appearance, being neatly and some
of them very prettily dressed. The programme consisted of nineteen
parts, interspersed with good music. Some of the pieces given were
very pleasing. The calisthenic exercises and the selections were
all well rendered and won many complimentary remarks, not only from
colored people, but also from prominent white families of the city.
It is something unusual to see the ladies of the latter class out.

Those who had seen the scholars at the beginning and at the end
of the session noticed a striking improvement in their personal
appearance. The intellectual, moral and spiritual culture had left
its stamp upon their countenances, and it was exhibited in their
deportment.

Throughout the year special attention has been given to our Mission
Sunday school, out of which has grown a little church. During the
precious revival of January, some of our pupils gave their hearts
to Christ. In all our successes and discouragements the Heavenly
Father has been very near us. Hon. J. H. Van Hoose, a correspondent
of the _Arkansas Democrat_, the leading journal of the State, which
is published at the Capital, a citizen of high standing in the
State for forty years, and thirty years in this place, asked to
give an impromptu speech, in which he expressed his surprise at the
progress made. The following, clipped from the above-named journal,
written by this gentleman, will explain the sentiments of the
citizens here toward our work:

[Illustration: A COTTON PLANTATION.]

“Prof. Foster (colored) and his wife, formerly of Little Rock,
have just closed a nine months’ school at the brick school-house
in the northeast part of Fayetteville. They were at first employed
by our school directors to teach a three months’ school for the
colored portion of our district, but they continued to teach six
months longer for a very small consideration paid them by the
patrons of the school and the American Missionary Association.
The examination exercises closed Thursday night with a public
exhibition. The school room was neat and clean and gorgeously
decorated with festoons and wreaths of evergreens and flowers, and
the house filled with an appreciative audience, the best of order
prevailed, and your correspondent was delighted with the evidences
of improvement in the manner and conduct of all who had been so
fortunate as to be under the influence and training of Prof. Foster
and his accomplished assistant, Mrs. Foster.”

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


TESTIMONY OF AN INDIAN AGENT.

[Major Gassman, who was formerly engaged in the ministry at Omaha,
Nebraska, but who now is serving as Indian agent in Dakota,
recently paid a visit to Hampton, where he gave to the students an
interesting account of his experience in Indian work, which was
published in the _Southern Workman_, and from which we make the
following extracts.—ED.]

I went to my post with fear and trembling. I had had no experience,
no business experience, or any but in the ministry; but I was sure
of one thing, that good, honest, persistent effort would bring good
results. I had heard about many of the iniquities and shortcomings
of agents. My friends warned me against the position. I knew that
the name of Indian agent had become almost a synonym of rascal or
cheat. I felt, however, that it was a position a man could fill
with honesty and integrity and good results. So I went to work.

I was horrified at the state of things I found. For many years
an agency had been established; thousands of dollars had been
expended; a great many men had been employed. But I saw that the
Indians were discouraged, doing nothing, sulky and averse to
effort. I arrived at the agency early in April, and found that
the fields had been left for a year untilled and in a filthy
condition. I had had early experience as a farmer. I called the
Indians together, and told them they must clean their fields. They
said they had no teams or ploughs. I asked if they couldn’t at
least clean them up? They said yes. I told them to begin and I’d
see what I could do for them, but there was no time to lose. They
said they would start to-morrow. The next morning I was waked by
loud talking. I looked out and saw at least fifty women with hoes,
axes and shovels on their shoulders—not a man among them. I took an
interpreter and went out to them. They said they had come to clean
the fields. I said that was good, but I hadn’t sent for them, but
for the men. They laughed at that idea—it was a novelty. I told
them the men must come, gave them some good advice on household
work for women—on which I am well posted—and sent them home. They
went their way, and that was the end of the work. I couldn’t get an
Indian man out that time. I was puzzled what to do next. I went
out to the fields with the interpreter, and we did find one old
man who had gone to work. I told him to go on, and I’d plow what
he would clean up, which I did. This encouraged one and another by
degrees, with the gift of extra rations, and so at last we got the
fields cleaned and planted.

The first year, though, was very trying, owing to my ignorance
of the Indian character. I spoke to them as I would to any one
else about truth and duty, etc., but met constant, persistent
opposition. I was wearied to death with their councils. Fifty to a
hundred great stalwart Indians would walk into my office, sit down
on the floor, and begin to smoke. Then I would wait with patience
till one of them would rise and make their wants known, and I
would answer them. But everything I proposed they would oppose,
for some reason I did not understand. They would tell me my words
were sweet, but that like all other white men, I was a liar. So it
went on for a year. It was rather hard to take their plain talk,
especially as I am somewhat of a muscular Christian. I gave them,
however, as good, plain talk as they sent, and let them understand
what I thought of them.

But at the end of a year I thought I might as well give it up. I
wrote to my friends that I thought of resigning. Then I called
the Indians to a last council. I told them what I felt, why I
came, what I had endeavored to do. I spoke feelingly. When I had
finished, an old chief, “Struck by the Ree,” got up and said: “We
have listened to your words for a year. We have now come to the
conclusion that we will both listen and obey. We had been told that
you were not a good man. Many of us believed what we heard, but you
have convinced us that you are good, and we will obey you.”

Well I stayed, and I had no more trouble, except such as was
unavoidable. The councils were more and more pleasant. I never had
a rude or disagreeable word from them again. They would sometimes
disagree with me, but generally took my advice, and were always
courteous.

I laid before them first this plan. I told them that rations and
aid from government are only temporary. They will come to an end.
They are given to aid them to be self-supporting. I told them I had
come to help them to become so. They were not much interested in
that idea at first, but as continued dropping wears away the rock,
my words from day to day had some effect, and here and there I saw
some improvement.

I found all the work at the agency done by whites—only two Indians
employed out of 2,000 Sioux at the station. I employed the Indians
as fast as possible to give them work. I put one boy in the
blacksmith shop, another with the carpenter, another in the mill,
two or three with the agency farmer, two in the butcher house, and
to help issue rations. When I came there I found the cattle were
slaughtered in a brutal manner, shot in a filthy yard, where the
Indians dressed the meat in a careless, unclean way. I applied for
a slaughter-house, cattle-pens and a proper butcher, and got them.
I put my Indian boys with him, as I said, and at the end of a month
they could take hold and do the work properly themselves, and did
it so six years. The beef was issued clean.

The system of employing Indians and encouraging industry was
pleasing. They were glad to see their young men employed; they were
willing to go to work when there was any encouragement to do so.

I had several thousand bushels of wheat to harvest. I succeeded in
getting the ground broken, the crop cultivated, the wheat ground
and eaten up, too. While they were threshing one hot day, some of
the Indians gave out. They sent me word from the field that two
more men were needed. I went out on my horse and looked about,
but couldn’t see an Indian anywhere but in the field. I rode to
the trader’s store, and there I found a young Indian _gentleman_,
gotten up in fine style, with red blanket, embroidered leggings
and moccasins, looking glass and fan; face painted, hair braided
and ornamented with feathers—“a fancy buck,” so they say out on the
frontier. I went up to him, laid my hand on his shoulder, and said,
“Friend, I want you.” He looked up with an independent air, and
said, “How!” I told him to get on his horse and follow me, which
he did. I took him into the field and up to the threshing machine,
and told the interpreter to tell him I wanted him to work and would
pay him so much. The Indian boys around laughed. I told them to
be quiet. He said “How,” and went at it. The only vacant place at
the machine was where the chaff and dust comes pouring out—not an
agreeable place for him—pouring out on his paint and oil. He never
had a pitchfork in his hands before, but he went to work manfully.
Pretty soon off came his red blanket; then off came the paint
itself in streaks. Piece by piece came off the rest of his toggery,
till the Indian was an Indian but not much besides. But he stuck
to that pitchfork. I watched him; if he had given out I would have
taken his place; but there was no give out to him; he worked right
on for three days; at the end of the time his delicate hands were
all bleeding.

That shows the pluck of the Indian. I have had other employés, who
had never done a thing before in the way of labor, work till the
blood ran down their hands. This one was, of course, a remarkable
case. But I have had Indians who labored for me industriously for
eight years without ever losing one day.

It was difficult to get them to save their wages. I finally adopted
a system of banking for them. They let me lay aside their wages
till the end of the quarter. Then we talked over the question what
they had better buy, and under my advice they generally spent their
money in useful articles, wagons, harness, stoves, furniture, etc.

I received satisfactory evidence that the Indian can be made a
laboring man, but in order to do it we must pay him good wages to
start with.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISSION WORK IN MAY.

REV. W. C. POND, SUPERINTENDENT.

The dry figures are as follows: Eighteen schools, forty-one
teachers, the number of pupils enrolled, 1,043; the average
attendance (lessened doubtless in San Francisco by the fact that
just now our street lamps are not lighted, and our dark streets
are not viewed by Chinese as conducive to their personal safety),
435. Total number enrolled during the nine months now past, of the
present fiscal year, 2,470. Word came of at least five among the
pupils who, during May, professed to have turned from the worship
of idols, and to have become the followers of Christ. It seems to
me that in several of the schools the interest in spiritual things
is deepening, and that the prospect brightens for a continuous and
large harvest.

“ALL QUIET UPON THE POTOMAC.” This proverb, dating back to the
troublous times of 1862, has often risen to my lips, as, week by
week, or day by day, I have asked tidings from our North School
in this city. In April it was established in permanent quarters,
where we believe it will grow to a size, and will cheer us with
a fruitfulness, second only to our central school. But in almost
every locality where we plant a school we are obliged by passive
resistance and patient endurance to “conquer a peace.” The struggle
has been longer and harder than usual in our North School, but
it seems to be over, and peace to be won. Our hoodlum neighbors
tried what virtue there was in outcries and in stones rattling
upon the roof and doors and blinds till they could have been
picked up by the bushel, and in various tricks which it would be
a waste of paper to describe, but have retired at last defeated
from the field, and the work moves on undisturbed. We have reason
to speak well of the protection extended us by the police, and to
remember with hearty admiration the heroic lady teacher who was the
principal sufferer and the champion in the fight.

A PROTEST FROM OROVILLE.—As the most strenuous efforts seem
unlikely to secure the funds needed in order to continue our
full work, we look about to see where the knife can be applied.
I thought that a vacation would do as little harm at Oroville
as anywhere, and I sent word to close the school from June till
September. The following protest came back signed by sixteen of
the pupils: “Dear pastor.—We heard from you that you told Miss M.
Deuel to close this school at present. We are very sorry, because
this school is doing very well. We would like to understand the
words of truth, but we cannot do it without the teacher’s help. So
we hope you will consent to open this school continually. Some of
the boys just became Christians. If school to be closed seems we
like the sheep without a shepherd; perhaps we going other ways and
fall in the river of death. Or, this Oroville have many precious
souls; if this school to be continue may be other people come to
school and hear who are speak the gospel of Christ and come to him,
that their souls may be save.” They go on to say that they know
that the school cannot but be smaller in summer than in winter, and
that they will try to sustain it without a Chinese helper, but they
cannot bear to have it closed.

How could I be deaf to such an appeal? I wrote them to do their
utmost to help me by their offerings and their prayers, and the
school should be continued. I confess that I do not know how I am
to maintain so large a work as ours now is, on resources so scanty;
but when souls are asking after God I cannot shut away the only
light that shines upon their path. I must trust God and trust God’s
people, and move on.

LETTERS FROM HONG SING.—Hong Sing has been a helper for four or
five years. At present he is stationed at Santa Cruz, where special
interest has existed for some time, and five of the pupils have
been led to Christ. Two recent letters from this helper giving
accounts of his discussions with the heathen about him have greatly
interested me. They are too long to be inserted here, and I
scarcely know how to condense them without spoiling the charm which
comes from his queer attempts to get the English idioms. But I must
make the endeavor to give one.

It describes in a pleasant way some of the petty annoyances to
which the Christian brethren are subjected by their heathen
countrymen; annoyances which, he says, make him think of Paul and
the other apostles; “though our trials it is a very trifle thing,
compared with theirs, _nothing_; yet I am dismayed because I get
impatient with them. I pray that God may open the blind of their
mind that they may see the Salvation of Christ.”

He then goes on to say: “They argue with me several times, but
every time they get angry, then I stop. * * * They say: ‘You tell
the people must not gamble, not smoke opium, not swear. These
things are very suitable for us. But tell us not worship gods and
our parents when they die, this hurt our heart. You just think your
mother: how much pain when she bear you, and now you grow to be a
man, so you forget and ungrateful. It seem to me you are not come
from your mother but from the mountain bank, so that you will not
honor father and mother. If you were my brother, I would kill you
instantly.’”

To all this Hong Sing replied: “Question is now, friends, _which
way_ we ought to honor father and mother, in life time or in death
time, with a kind word or with wrath answer your mother. Mind your
mother is honor or disobey is honor. Suppose when you come to
California your father and mother give you good advice—must not
gamble, not smoke opium, not go among the bad men, not be indolent
but industrious. You just see how many has been gambling, how many
smoke opium and do such evil things. Is this obey parent, honor,
admire? I think not at all. This is disobey, dishonor, ingratitude.
When I was in China I often see and hear of many men has beat
mother with a stick and not like to support her living, but permit
her starve and not let her have good food. But when she die then
you put ten pound pork and chicken and many things set on the
table, ask her to eat. In life time when she can eat and drink,
never buy five cents worth meat. When die, no eat, no drink. So you
will kill a calf, set on a table to ask her to eat and drink. It
is vanity. Our Confucius has said, ‘If any man were good conduct
and endeavor to walk on the wisdom way and good virtue that show to
obey and honor father and mother. Therefore, every man know he is
a good man and understand that he must have had good parents, and
he never said to honor our parents by worshipping them when they
die.’” Other points were made which cannot be reproduced. Under
ordinary circumstances I discourage all debating with the heathen.
I advise our helpers to keep close to their own work, which is to
preach the gospel.

       *       *       *       *       *




BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

MISS D. E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES ON MEETINGS OF STATE SOCIETIES.

The Woman’s Home Missionary Society, connected with the State
Association of Michigan, held its session during the meetings of
that body. The ladies present were addressed by Mrs. Norton, of
Dakota, and Miss Rose M. Kinney, of Georgia. Brief remarks were
made by Messrs Clark, Cobb, Gilbert and Pike. Mrs. Leroy Warren
was re-elected president, and measures were adopted providing for
co-operation with the benevolent societies of the Congregational
churches working in this country. It is probable that efforts will
be made by the ladies to bring the claims of these societies before
the people of Michigan in the early autumn.

       *       *       *       *       *

The ladies of Iowa will continue to support their missionary, Miss
A. D. Gerrish, at New Orleans, La., and as they too have organized
for better co-operation, it is confidently hoped that the response
from the ladies will enable them to assume the support of a second
missionary, at some other point. They have selected as a State
Committee Mrs. S. H. Smith, of Davenport, and Mrs. J. H. Ellsworth,
of McGregor.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the recent State Conference of Vermont, a special meeting of
the ladies was called to hear the claims of the A. M. A. missions
presented by Miss D. E. Emerson, and a good degree of interest
was manifested, resulting in the appointment of a committee of
three, Mrs. A. W. Wilde, of Charlotte, Mrs. Henry Fairbanks, of
St. Johnsbury, and Mrs. Bowman, of Newport, to secure co-operation
among the ladies of the Congregational churches of Vermont in
support of a missionary in the South.

At the meeting of the Woman’s Aid to the A. M. A., in connection
with the Maine State Conference, there was a large and appreciative
audience to listen to the reports of their two missionaries, Misses
Lunt and Farrington.

It was evident that the frequent correspondence with these
missionaries, and the knowledge thus gained of the field, had
quickened the sympathies of those contributing to their support,
and there is every reason to believe that the collections will
increase so that a third missionary will in good time be adopted,
either in the South or in the Indian Mission. Miss D. E. Emerson
addressed the ladies on the general work of the A. M. A. in the
South. In order to vary the means of raising funds and to awaken
more interest in the churches, a system of rotation of committees
is followed, and a new State Committee was therefore appointed:
Mrs. Hubbard, of Hiram; Miss L. C. Vose, of Dennysville, and
Miss S. Waldron, of Augusta. It was gratifying to learn that the
Committee of the past year, of which Miss Smith was chairman, laid
aside with regret the duties which, though involving considerable
care, had proved more a pleasure than a burden.

       *       *       *       *       *

The ladies of Illinois have adopted the same plan of aid to the
A. M. A. as the ladies of Maine, and have appointed as a State
Committee Mrs. E. F. Williams, of Chicago; Mrs. H. L. Boltwood, of
Ottawa, and Mrs. Charles Perry, of Geneva. Already the conferences
have been districted to the State Committee, and the sub-collectors
appointed. They will continue the support of a missionary at
Mobile, Ala., and have adopted also Miss Rose M. Kinney to
represent them at Little Rock, Ark.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of the ladies appointed at the Illinois Meeting has written an
encouraging letter which indicates the heartiness with which the
work is entered upon in that State. She says: “Last month we heard
the sound of the new departure from Maine. When we are sure it is
the Master calling, the sound flies quickly, and we are thankful it
has so soon reached Illinois. We already, from the new consecration
it arouses in us, are buckling on the armor. I assure you that from
the ladies of this State will come no uncertain sound. We must do
the work.”

       *       *       *       *       *


[That our friends may know the spirit that pervades our missionary
teachers, enabling them to rise above the discouragements and
trials of the field in the joy of Christian service, we give
a few gleanings from recent correspondence not written for
publication.—D. E. E.]

—I never enjoyed my work so much as during the past year, although
it was never so hard before.

—The year’s work has been such a pleasant one that I am reluctant
to bring it to a close, although I feel the need of the coming rest.

—I hope my return another year may be favorably considered by you,
as I must see _my boys_ through. I have but just begun the work.
I like it and feel that another year I could accomplish much more
than I have this.

—My health has failed and it is thought to be a risk for me to
remain through the year. It is a great disappointment to me,
I believe the greatest I ever had, for I love the work and so
strongly hoped I should be able to continue. But God knows best.
Perhaps in years to come He may grant me such measure of strength
as will enable me again to enter this field.

—Our scholars have done good, faithful work for some time past
and the results will show, I am sure. I _do_ enjoy the work
thoroughly. Of course there are times of discouragement, days when
we wonder if some one else could not do more or better for those
who are under our instruction, when it seems as if it were spending
our strength for naught; but I suppose every person knows what it
is to feel so, and I certainly am glad to do what I can while I can.

—We are very busy now, this last half of the year. My room is
very full—sixty-eight. They sit thickly together, close up to my
platform, and three with me by my desk. I enjoy my school very
much, even more than I anticipated, especially now that I really
know my scholars individually. I have many who are eighteen or
twenty years old and I feel anxious for them to learn all they can,
for fear they may not come another year. I really trust I may be
led in just the right way in this work, for I came here with that
one desire.

—On reaching here I found Miss —— busy in her preparation to leave
in answer to your call. The young people look as sad as though
parting with a mother, and several, both old and young, said to me:
“Do tell them in New York they must send her back—she understands
us so well and we her, and it would take a long time for a
stranger, to know us.” One old man said, “I tell you she is smart.”
Oh, how I do wish she could go before the ladies of our Northern
churches and tell of this work. I know that they are very ignorant
in regard to the needs of these fields. I know, too, there is a
willingness to do if they could only be shown the needs and be once
awakened.

       *       *       *       *       *


WORK AT THE DAKOTA MISSION.

In the AMERICAN MISSIONARY for April we gave a statement relating
to the transfer by the American Board of its Dakota mission to the
A. M. A., and published a list of the missionaries. Among these
were Miss Illsley, Mrs. Steer, Miss Voorhees and Miss Webb, who
were laboring at the Santee Agency. We have gleaned from their
circular letters in the _Word Carrier_ the following extracts which
indicate the importance and success of woman’s work for the Indians.

Miss Illsley says: “As each one who writes will naturally tell of
her own work, it becomes my pleasure to speak especially of our
life at the Bird’s Nest. Miss Brown and I think we have seventeen
as interesting little girls to look after as can be. Our oldest
is twelve, and our youngest five years of age. All are doing well
in school. Our little girls love to learn their Bible verses, and
while we teach them the words, we hope and feel that God impresses
the truths on their hearts as we cannot. Many of them say, ‘I am
going to read the Bible to mamma when I go home.’”

Mrs. Steer writes: “I deem it one of the highest privileges granted
to me in this life to be numbered among the Dakota missionaries,
although with the care of my family I can do but little definite
missionary work. Yet I would be loath to stand as an outsider. God
granting me the strength of body, I hope soon to take a more active
part in this grand work. We have strong evidence that God’s Spirit
is with us at this time, and a number of our young people have
been led to think seriously of their spiritual condition, and have
entered the fold which has Christ for its Shepherd.”

Miss Voorhees writes: “I have had nineteen boys in my care, until
the Poncas left. Seven are now in bed with the measles. Some of
them are very sick, but all are so patient and obedient that it
makes the work of caring for them comparatively easy. The three
Berthold boys are very interesting, and I think promising boys.
Miss Calhoun, Mrs. Hall’s sister, is associated with me at present.
Though our boys are too small to see any decided results just yet,
one of them has expressed a desire to unite with the church.”

Miss Webb says: “The amount there is to be done and overcome too
often discourages and overwhelms us, and it seems to me in a letter
like this, a few thoughts on points of progress and improvement
may be helpful. There seems to me to have been progress in
spiritual, mental and physical aspects. There is a hidden principle
in our girls to which we can effectually appeal, which has been
developing, and makes dealing with them by force and various
contrived punishments less and less necessary. They are more open
to reason, and are more influenced by kind talks, and a knowledge
of our desires for them. There is not the clannishness among them,
which made it so hard to discipline one, because all would rebel
and side with the erring one. These are a few of the indications
which show the heart is being educated, and the seed is taking
root. There is also more gratitude manifest, more diligence in
study, and more real live interest shown. We hear less frequently,
and more reasonably, ‘give me this or that,’ which seemed to come
so continually, and in such a way as to make us feel all they
thought or cared about was what they could get out of us, and there
is less fault-finding with what they receive. Looking at them in
a physical aspect it would almost seem as if some of them had
new bodies, so much have they improved by their regular life and
habits.”

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]


A LITTLE MERCHANT.

BY MISS E. E. BACKUP.

It could hardly be called a village; there were a few houses, a few
stores, and a mammoth hotel. During “the season” all the life of
the place seemed to centre about the hotel. The building covered
considerable space, and two sides were inclosed with glass, which
gave it quite an Oriental air. The hotel was known for miles
around, and when the house was full a pleasurable excitement
pervaded the little hamlet. It extended to the little pickaninnies
who rolled and tumbled in the log cabins which dotted the
landscape in every direction as far as the eye could reach. What a
scramble there was to see the gentlemen and ladies as they walked
or drove by, and a party on horseback was a sight sufficiently
imposing to warrant extra efforts.

To these little folks, who never pored dreamily over enchanting
fairy tales, Denis Hotel was a veritable fairy palace inhabited by
choice fairies from the dim and shadowy Northland, whose pockets
contained a never failing supply of gold. This latter was almost
an article of faith among the youthful colored population of K.,
and developed a very large eye for business. The roads swarmed with
colored urchins desirous of selling various wares. One class of
infants had an inexhaustible supply of gourds which they offered
at remarkably low rates to the “Yankee” ladies. Another class of
juveniles was of a geological turn, and enough arrow-heads and
other Indian “remains” were offered for sale to stock several
national museums. Then, when all else failed, there were the sweet
wild flowers which seemed softly to plead for the dark little
fingers which had lovingly brought them forth into the light.

General Grant was one of the most indefatigable and successful of
the little merchants, as was befitting the namesake of a great
General. Intelligence beamed from the General’s dark face, and
there was no resisting the mute appeal of his large, lustrous eyes.

“What, more flowers!” we exclaimed, one day, “and jessamine, too!
five cents? Oh, yes, we’ll take them. Really, General, you must be
growing rich.”

“I does right smart, thank you,” with a smile and a bow, the
graceful native politeness more than atoning for the defective
speech.

“We rejoice in your success, General,” chimed in Mr. Brown. “Two
or three little rascals have tried to make us believe that their
pennies all went straight into the contribution box. It’s likely we
should believe such nonsense! Now we would just like to know what
you do with your money. Buy candy, I’ll be bound.”

The large eyes grew a trifle larger as their little owner
unflinchingly encountered Mr. Brown’s steadfast gaze. “We chillens
are mighty fond of candy,” he said, “and it’s seldom we get a bit.
I did buy some candy once for the young uns, but the rest has done
gone for homespun.”

“What do you do with homespun?”

“Why, mammy makes dresses for the girls. Sally looked mighty peart
last night when she put on her new dress, and didn’t she dance
’round though,” and the kind eyes grew moist at the recollection.

“Then you don’t put money in the contribution box?” Mr. Brown
continued.

“We put a cent in ‘most every Sunday. But we get our Sunday-school
money ‘knocking up Jerusalem.’”

“The dickens!” exclaimed Mr. Brown, quite forgetting himself, “and
how do you ‘knock up Jerusalem’?”

“‘Knocking up Jerusalem’ is a song, sir,” our little hero
respectfully replied; “and we shall be right proud to sing it to
you sometime if you’ll come to the cabin. And you ain’t to give us
anything, neither.”

“We’ll come,” said Mr. Brown. “We want to see Sally’s new gown, and
I wouldn’t fail to hear ‘Knocking up Jerusalem.’”

We went, according to promise, and were most hospitably received
at the little cabin. We admired Sally’s blue and white homespun,
and when that subject was exhausted we listened to “Knocking up
Jerusalem.” The five children stood in a row with Gen. Grant at
their head, and kept time with their feet as they sang. It was
evidently one of the old-time spiritual songs, a queer mixture, and
we listened with mingled feelings of interest and regret—interest
in the dark, earnest little faces, and the sweet, pathetic strains,
regret at the words and gestures, alike meaningless.

The song ended, we talked of Jesus, and these little ones, ignorant
and untaught, yet knew of Him as the children’s Friend.

Gen. Grant was actively engaged as long as we remained in K., but
it was slow work after all, and we became so interested in his
unselfish efforts, that we determined to aid him. Enough homespun
for several dresses was privately left at the cabin, together with
a few simple papers and books, of which the cabin was utterly
destitute. The day we left, Gen. Grant was at the station to
present us with a beautiful bouquet, and we almost cried ourselves
as he bade us a tearful good-bye.

Our chief regret for K. is that we can do so little to improve the
condition of the colored people there. Poor and ignorant, they need
what they have never had, an educated teacher. We wish the A. M. A.
was rich enough to sustain a school in every Southern village.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR JUNE, 1883.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $210.86.

    Bangor. First Cong.                                      $20.56
    Dennysville. Peter E. Vose, 8; Mrs. Samuel
      Eastman, 5                                              13.00
    Eastport. Bbl. of C., _for Raleigh, N.C._,
      1.50 _for Freight_                                       1.50
    Foxcroft. Mrs D. Blanchard                                 5.00
    Machias. Centre St. Ch. and Soc., 6.96; Sab.
      Sch., 5.11                                              12.07
    Portland. Seamen’s Bethel, 34; St. Lawrence
      St. Ch. and Soc., 9.73                                  43.73
    Saco. Ladies’ Sew. Soc. of Cong. Ch., Box and
      Bbl. of C., _for Atlanta U._
    Warren. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         15.00
    Washington Co. “Washington Co. Bible Soc.,”
      _for Bibles_                                           100.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $378.24.

    Amherst. “L. F. B.”                                       20.00
    Bristol. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.00
    Derry. Young People of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Bird’s Nest, Santee Agency_                50.00
    Dover. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           10.00
    Gilsum. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                17.75
    Hanover. Dart. College Ch.                                87.71
    Henniker. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. DEA.
      S.Q.A. NEWTON L. M.                                     30.00
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               9.44
    Hollis. Cong. Ch.                                         10.74
    Hopkinton. Bbl. of C., _for Raleigh, N.C._
      Nashua. Pilgrim Ch. and Soc.                            88.10
    Pittsfield. Mrs. Emily Hill, _for Atlanta, Ga._            5.00
    Short Falls. J. W. Chandler                                2.00
    Temple. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   36.50
    Wakefield. Rev. N. Barker, 2; Mrs. M. J.
      Barker, 1                                                3.00
    ——. “A Friend of the Freedmen”                             3.00


  VERMONT, $479.15.

    Benson. “J. K.”                                            2.00
    Danby. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                                 2.27
    Danville. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 20.00
    Dorset. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                10.00
    East Hardwick. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          7.28
    Lyndon. Dr. L. W. Hubbard                                  1.50
    New Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             50.00
    Norwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 10; Mrs. B. B.
      Newton, 5                                               15.00
    Orwell. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                18.50
    Pittsford. “D.”                                            1.00
    Rutland. Box of C., _for Raleigh, N.C._, _5
      for Freight_                                             5.00
    Springfield. A. Woolson, 200; Mrs. E. D.
      Parks, 100                                             300.00
    Townsend. Mrs. H. Holbrook                                 2.50
    Wallingford. Cog. Ch. and Soc.                            37.10
    Windham. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   7.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $5,475.95.

    Abington. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 33.62;
      First Parish Sab. Sch., 10                              43.62
    Andover. Teachers and Pupils, Abbots Academy              62.00
    Belchertown. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      ADDISON H. BARTLETT AND FREDERICK L.
      STEBBINS L. Ms.                                         67.00
    Bellerica. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Kindergarten,
      Atlanta_, Ga.                                            2.50
    Beverly. Dane St. Ch. and Soc.                           136.00
    Boston. Shawmut Cong. Ch., 451.15; Mrs. E. C.
      Ford, 20; Central Ch., 10; “Friend,” 1                 482.15
    Boston. Walnut Av. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   56.99
    Boylston. Mrs. John B. Gough                               2.68
    Brookline. Harvard Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Brookline. “Harvard Wide Awakes,” 6.50; and
      Pkg. Papers, _for Raleigh, N.C._                         6.50
    Cambridge. Young Ladies’ Working Party of
      Shepherd Ch., Bundle of C., _for Indian
      Children in Bird’s Nest, Santee Agency_
    Charlemont. Edward Graves                                  1.00
    Chelsea. Arthur C. Stone, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             60.00
    Chelsea. Ladies Union Home Mission Band, _for
      Lady Missionary, Chattanooga, Tenn._                    60.00
    Colerain. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              15.00
    Curtisville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           16.00
    Dalton. First Cong. Ch.                                   30.33
    Dorchester. Stoughton St. Baptist Sab. Sch.,
      Two Pkgs. Picture Cards, _for Indian
      Children_
    East Granville. Cong. Ch.                                 24.00
    Fitchburg. “A Friend”                                      2.00
    Georgetown. Memorial Ch., $42.08; First Cong.
      Ch. and Soc., $30.75                                    72.83
    Georgetown. Woman’s Mission Soc., _for Dakota
      M._                                                      6.54
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch.                                       60.00
    Holliston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             20.00
    Hopkinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             79.64
    Ipswich. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         35.00
    Lawrence. “Merry Workers” Mission Circle of
      Lawrence St Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._              5.00
    Littleton. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             26.00
    Lynn. Central Ch. and Soc., $70; First Cong.
      Ch. and Soc., $39.54, to const. JOHN W.
      DARCY L. M.                                            109.54
    Malden. Rev. W. H. Willcox, D.D., _for
      Furnishing Room, Stone Hall, Atlanta U._               100.00
    Malden. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          36.40
    Marblehead. Hon. J. J. H. Gregory, Box of
      Garden Seeds _for Talladega C._, and two
      packages _for Raleigh, N.C._
    Marshfield. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                         20.00
    Medfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       82.20
    Medway. Village Ch. and Soc.                              96.80
    Newbury. First Ch. and Soc.                               30.00
    Newburyport. “Friends,” Cask and Bbl. of
      articles, _for Mission Schools, Charlotte,
      N.C._
    Newton. Ladies Aid Soc., Bbl. of C., _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Newton Centre. Ladies Benev. Soc., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                43.50
    Newtonville. Mrs. J. W. Hayes, 5; ——, 5; ——,
      2, _for Raleigh, N.C._                                  12.00
    Northampton. “A Friend”                                  100.00
    Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          33.25
    Orange. Cen. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           11.32
    Orleans. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               15.00
    Peabody. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Pepperell. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., for Student
      Aid, Fisk U.                                            50.00
    Pittsfield. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      42.08
    Rutland. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          7.53
    Salem. Tabernacle Ch. and Soc., 250.15; George
      Driver, 2                                              252.15
    Saundersville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         15.00
    Somerville. Prospect Hill Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   70.00
    South Hadley. Teachers, Mt. Holyoke Sem.                  20.00
    South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., to
      const. JOSEPH E. TORREY and MRS. ANNA M.
      TIRRELL L. Ms.                                          52.00
    Stockbridge. Miss Alice Byington, 48; “A few
      Ladies,” Basted Work, _for Raleigh, N.C._               48.00
    Stoneham. Basted Patchwork, _for Raleigh, N.C._
    Sturbridge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            44.80
    Taunton. Union Ch. and Soc.                               13.32
    Taunton. Winslow. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             50.00
    Taunton. Sewing Soc. of Broadway Ch., _for
      Atlanta U., Freight_                                     1.00
    Tewksbury. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid. Fisk U._                                           10.00
    Topsfield. Philena Stevens                                 1.00
    Townsend. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              20.50
    Townsend Harbor. Dea. John Proctor                         1.00
    Upton. Mrs. Austin Putnam                                  1.50
    Watertown. Phillips Ch. and Soc., to const.
      MISS ABBIE B. CONANT, FRANK M. CONANT, MRS.
      ABIGAIL G. CONANT and MRS. ELIZABETH A.
      KEYES L. Ms.                                           130.00
    Watertown. Ladies of Phillips Ch., Bbl. of C.,
      _for Atlanta U._
    Westminster. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. DR.
      G. B. SWASEY L. M.                                      60.70
    West Pelham. “X.”                                          1.00
    Williamstown. Rev. Mark Hopkins, D.D.                     25.00
    Winchendon. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      86.81
    Winchendon. Atlanta Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             35.00
    Worcester. Plymouth Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      128.24; Central Ch. and Soc., 91.53                    219.77
    Worcester. Piedmont Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        25.00
    ——. “A Friend,” to const. CHARLES W. HOWLAND
      L. M.                                                   30.00
    ——. Package Picture Cards, etc.
    ——. Herbert H. Dole, Bundle Papers and C.
    ——. “Pansy,” 7 “Pansy” books, _for Talladega C._
                                                         ----------
                                                          $3,475.95

    LEGACY.

    Whitinsville. Estate of E. W. Fletcher, by
      Charles P. Whitin, Ex.                               2,000.00
                                                         ----------
                                                          $5,475.95


  RHODE ISLAND, $3.52.

    Westerly. Women’s Benev. Soc., 3.52, _for
      Raleigh, N.C., Freight_                                  3.52


  CONNECTICUT, $1,956.49.

    Bethlehem. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                                10.00
    Bristol. Mrs. S. T. Smith                                  1.50
    Colchester. First Cong. Ch.                               86.05
    Colebrook. Cong. Ch.                                      26.59
    Coventry. First Cong. Ch.                                 46.38
    East Haddam. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     88.75
    East Hartford. Cong. Ch., 15; A. Williams, 5              20.00
    Ellsworth. Cong. Ch.                                      13.78
    Essex. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        32.50
    Granby. South Cong. Ch.                                    6.00
    Greenville. Cong. Ch.                                     27.82
    Guilford. Third Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                                32.00
    Hartford. First Ch., 500.25; “A Friend in
      Asylum Hill Cong Ch.,” 15; Miss Mary
      Herrick, 5                                             520.25
    Kensington. Miss E. Cowles, 2; Mrs. M. Cowles, 1           3.00
    Kent. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                                 30.00
    Little River. A. Doolittle                                10.00
    Manchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      57.08
    Middlebury. Cong. Ch.                                     23.98
    Middletown. First Ch.                                     75.56
    Mill Brook. Mrs. E. Pinney, 1; Mrs. E. R.
      Allen, 50c                                               1.50
    New Britain. “A Friend”                                   15.00
    New Haven. Dwight Place Cong. Ch., 29.22; Ch.
      of the Redeemer (ad’l), 10; Mrs. Sylvia
      Johnson, 10                                             49.22
    New London. “Church of Christ”                            34.62
    New Preston Hill. Cong. Ch., 15.40, and Sab.
      Sch., 3.60                                              19.00
    Norfolk. Cong. Ch.                                        50.00
    Norwich. John A. Rockwell, M.D., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        10.00
    Plymouth. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Putnam. Second Cong. Ch., to const. GEORGE S.
      BRADLEY and CHARLES H. RATTHEI L. Ms.                   83.00
    Riverton. Cong. Ch.                                        2.00
    Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                       12.50
    Sharon. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             62.18
    Stamford. First Cong Ch.                                  57.83
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      35.61
    Thompson. Cong Ch. and Soc.                               29.56
    Unionville. First Cong. Ch.                               25.73
    Westford. Cong. Ch.                                        3.00
    West Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            23.50
    Wethersfield. Rev. G. J. Tillotson, _for
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst. Land._                         250.00
    Winsted. First Ch. Sabbath Sch., for
      Furnishing Room, Talladega C.                           35.00
    Woodbury. North Cong. Ch.                                 21.00


  NEW YORK, $7,529.56.

    Bristol. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            1.00
    Bridgewater. Cong. Ch.                                    16.32
    Brooklyn. South Cong. Ch., 101.18; “A Friend.”
      5.00                                                   106.18
    Greigsville. Mrs. F. A. Gray                               1.00
    Havana. J. F. Phelps                                       2.00
    Jefferson. Susannah Ruliffson                              3.00
    Mott’s Corners. Cong. Ch.                                  3.20
    New York. S. T. Gordon, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                    200.00
    New York. Mrs. W. E. Dodge, 100.00 Rev. D.
      Stuart Dodge, 50.00, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                            150.00
    New York. Mrs. W. P. McPherson, Material for
      Pulpit-covers, _for Talladega C._
    New York. Erastus Hayes 1 doz. Feather
      Dusters, Val., 12., _for Raleigh, N.C._
    North Franklin. Mr. and Mrs. David Foote                  10.00
    Perry Center. Cong. Ch.                                   81.24
    Perry Center. Ladies Benev. Soc., _for
      Raleigh, N.C., Freight_                                  3.20
    Rochester. Gen. A. W. Riley                               50.00
    Saugerties. Cong. Ch.                                     17.42
    South Byron. Wallace Fisk, Automatic seed
      planter, _for Talladega C._
    Spencerport. Cong. Ch.                                    22.00
    Springville. Mrs. Lawrence Weber                           3.00
    Thiells. J. H. Cassedy, _for School Building,
      Talladega, Ala._                                     5,000.00
    ——  —— ——                                                 50.00
                                                         ----------
                                                          $5,719.56

    LEGACIES.

    Brooklyn. E. D. Estate of Mary Withington, by
      John. N. Stearns, Ex.                                1,660.00
    New York. Estate of Wm. E. Dodge, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                       150.00
                                                         ----------
                                                          $7,529.56


  NEW JERSEY, $123.50.

    Montclair. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., 53, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U_; 35 _for Student Aid.
      Hampton N. & A. Inst._,                                 88.00
    New Brunswick. I. P. Langdon, to const. REV.
      DR. THOMAS CHALMERS EASTON, L. M.                       30.00
    Sayreville. A. B. Karner                                   0.50
    Summit. Central Presb. Ch.                                 5.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $4.00.

    Fannettsburg. Geo. W. Park. Flower seeds and
      “Floral Guide” for ’83, _for Talladega C._
    Providence. Cong. Ch.                                      4.00


  OHIO, $472.67.

    Brighton. Cong. Ch.                                        5.17
    Cleveland. ——                                              1.50
    Jersey. Mrs. Lucinda Sinnet                               60.00
    Madison. Ladies’ Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                            13.00
    Medina. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Mount Vernon. Cong. Ch., 142.66; and Young
      Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., 10. to const. MRS.
      CHARLES COOPER and GEORGE S. PENFIELD L. Ms.           152.66
    Oberlin. Ladies’ Soc. of Second Cong. Ch.,
      _for Lady Missionary, Atlanta, Ga._                     75.00
    Peru. “Friends,” _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                     40.00
    Perrysburg. Rev. J. K. Deering                             0.85
    Ravenna. Cong Ch., to const. MRS. SARAH K.
      HARMON, L. M.                                           53.24
    Rootstown. Cong Ch.                                       26.25
    Salem. D. A. Allen, _for Tillotson C. and N.
      Inst._                                                  25.00
    Toledo. P. A. Nichols                                      5.00
    ——. “Ohio”                                                 5.00


  INDIANA, $4.50.

    Versailles. J. D. Nichols                                  4.50


  ILLINOIS, $1,101.09.

    Alton. Church of the Redeemer                             40.00
    Canton. First Cong. Ch.                                   45.00
    Chicago. E. W. Blatchford, _for a Teacher,
      Atlanta U._                                            300.00
    Chicago. First Cong. Ch., 143.04; N. E. Cong.
      Ch., 31.93                                             174.97
    Chicago. Young Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., U. P. Ch.,
      _for Teacher, Santee Agency_                             8.93
    Chicago. Miss C. E. Stanton, Box Papers, _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Creston. Dement Cong. Ch.                                  8.55
    Cornell. Mrs. B. R. Johnson                                5.00
    Garden Prairie. Willie L. Dawson                           0.75
    Hennepin. Cong. Ch.                                        5.40
    Highland. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch., $50; _incorrectly
      acknowledged in July number._
    Homer. Cong. Ch.                                          13.26
    Moline. Ladies’ Aid Soc. of First Cong. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              25.00
    Oak Park. Cong. Ch.                                      253.11
    Oak Park. Girls’ Mission Circle, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Odell. Cong. Ch., 21.50, and Sab. Sch., 5.50              27.00
    Paxton. “A Friend,” 9.00; Cong. Sab. Sch.,
      1.76, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                     10.76
    Princeton. Mrs. P. B. Corss                               15.00
    Wilmette. ARTHUR B. SMITH, to const. himself
      L. M.                                                   30.00
    Winnetka. Cong. Ch., to const. JOHN T. DALE L. M.         28.36
                                                         ----------
                                                          $1,051.09

    LEGACY.

    Chicago. Estate of Mrs. Lucinda Kilborn, by F.
      B. Ives, M.D.                                           50.00
                                                         ----------
                                                          $1,101.09


  MICHIGAN, $198.00.

    Detroit. “A Cheerful Giver”                               30.00
    Buchanan. B. M. Pennell                                   10.00
    Grand Rapids. Park Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rev.
      J. J. H. Sengstack_                                     20.00
    Grass Lake. Cong. Ch.                                     15.00
    Hancock. Cong. Ch.                                       108.00
    Hancock. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Theo. Dept.,
      Talladega C._                                           15.00
    Kalamazoo. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., Box of
      Bedding, _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst._


  IOWA, $1082.07.

    Anamosa. Cong. Ch., _for Lady Missionary. New
      Orleans, La._                                           15.00
    Cherokee. Cong. Ch., _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                           10.00
    Chester Center. Mrs. E. Fisher                             5.00
    Creston. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., Pilgrim Parish,
      _for Student Aid. Tougaloo U._                          20.00
    Danville. Mrs. Harriet Huntington                        899.12
    Dunlap. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                    2.70
    Fort Madison. Francis Sawyer                              20.00
    Green Mountain. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           12.00
    Iowa City. Cong Ch. (21 of which from Ladies,
      _for Lady Missionary, New Orleans, La._)                93.20
    Stacyville. Woman’s Miss’y Soc.                            3.00
    Waterloo. Bbl of C., _for Talladega, Ala._,
      2.05 _for freight_                                       2.05


  WISCONSIN. $179.00.

    Blake’s Prairie. Cong Ch.                                  3.00
    Columbus. Olivet Cong. Ch.                                19.65
    Ripon. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Montgomery, Ala._                           17.50
    River Falls. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               8.35
    Rosendale. Cong. Ch.                                      25.00
    Sheboygan. Mrs. L. H. Chase                                9.00
    Viroqua. Ladies’ Aid Soc., _for Macon, Ga._                5.00
    Wauwatosa. Cong. Ch., to const. JAMES L.
      SEXTON and Miss ISABELLA E. GILBERT L. Ms               76.00
    Windsor. Union Cong. Ch.                                  15.50


  KANSAS, $43.81.

    East and West Branch. Cong. Chs.                           7.00
    Burlington. First Cong. Ch.                               22.81
    Wabaunsee. Cong. Ch.                                      14.00


  MISSOURI, $100.00.

    St. Louis. Mrs. R. Webb                                  100.00


  COLORADO, $135.36.

    Colorado Springs. First Cong. Ch.                        106.76
    Denver. First Cong. Ch.                                   28.60


  MINNESOTA, $41.63.

    Faribault. “Helping Hand,” _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                            11.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 25.63
    Plainview. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc.                             5.00


  NEBRASKA, $11.80.

    Aten. Rev. Lewis Bridgman                                  5.00
    Crete. Olive Branch Ch.                                    3.30
    Red Cloud. Cong. Ch.                                       3.50


  DAKOTA, $2.00.

    Springfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            2.00


  WASHINGTON TER., $1.50.

    New Tacoma. Mrs. Eliza Taylor                              1.50


  OREGON, $5.00.

    Albany. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00


  KENTUCKY, $117.60.

    Lexington. Tuition                                        42.25
    Williamsburg. Tuition                                     75.35


  TENNESSEE, $677.50.

    Nashville. Fisk University, Tuition                      452.75
    Knoxville. Second Cong. Ch.                               12.00
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch., Tuition                          212.75


  NORTH CAROLINA, $181.66.

    Wilmington. Williston Normal Sch., Tuition               176.66
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $10.00.

    Charleston. Plymouth Ch.                                  10.00


  GEORGIA, $479.90.

    Atlanta. Storrs’ Sch., Tuition, 205.69; Rent,
      3; First Cong. Ch., 30                                 238.69
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition, 172.80; Cong.
      Ch., 20                                                192.80
    McIntosh. Tuition                                          6.70
    Savannah. “Friends” by S. B. Morse, _for
      Furnishing Room, Stone Hall, Atlanta U._                31.71
    Savannah. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00


  ALABAMA, $554.75.

    Athens. Trinity Sch., Tuition                             93.15
    Marion. Cong. Ch., 13; Tuition, 5.50                      18.50
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition                           140.65
    Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
    Selma. First Cong. Ch.                                     5.40
    Talladega. Talladega C., Tuition                         260.05
    Talladega. Cong. Ch. (1 of which _for Needmore
      Ch._), 11; C. B. Rice, 10                               21.00
    Talladega. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Chinese
      M._                                                      6.00


  FLORIDA, $43.00.

    St. Augustine. Rent                                       43.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $124.30.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition, 112.90, Rent,
      11.40                                                  124.30


  LOUISIANA, $174.95.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                        174.95


  TEXAS, $386.20.

    Austin. Tillotson C. and N. Inst., Tuition               361.20
    Austin. Sab. Sch., _for Tillotson C. & N.
      Inst. Building_                                         25.00


  INCOMES, $1,268.34.

    Avery Fund                                                25.00
    De Forest Fund, _for President’s Chair,
      Talladega C._                                          375.00
    Graves Library Fund, _for Atlanta U._                    150.00
    Hammond Fund                                             125.00
    Le Moyne Fund                                             50.00
    Plumb Scholarship Fund, _for Fisk U._                     50.00
    Tuthill King Fund, 125, _for Atlanta U., and
      25 for Berea C._                                       150.00
    Theological Endowment Fund, _for Howard U._              308.34
    Town Bonds, Greenwich, N.Y., _for Straight U._            35.00


  JAMAICA, WEST INDIES, $10.00.

    Richmond. Rev. H. B. Walcott, 5; Mrs. M. J.
      Wolcott, 5                                              10.00
                                                         ----------
    Total for June                                       $23,567.90
    Total from Oct. 1 to June 30                        $202,452.51
                                                       ------------


  FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions                                             65.08
    Previously acknowledged                                  635.39
                                                         ----------
    Total                                                   $700.47
                                                         ----------

                                  H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
                                        56 Reade St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *




AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As
closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted
CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its
humane and Christian policy toward the INDIANS.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing number of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.


STATISTICS FOR 1882.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In District of Columbia, 1; Virginia, 1;
North Carolina, 9; South Carolina, 2; Georgia, 14; Kentucky, 7;
Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 14; Kansas, 2; Arkansas, 1; Louisiana, 17;
Mississippi, 5; Texas, 6; _Africa_, 3; _Among the Indians_, 2.
Total, 88.

       *       *       *       *       *




                          [Illustration]

                            HORSFORD’S

                          ACID PHOSPHATE.

                             (LIQUID.)

                FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
                     EXHAUSTION, NERVOUSNESS,
                       DIMINISHED VITALITY,
                    URINARY DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

              PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF

             Prof. E. N. Horsford, of Cambridge, Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical
authority of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has
ever been offered to the public which seems to so happily meet the
general want as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free
on application.

                       MANUFACTURED BY THE

                     RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,

                        Providence, R.I.,

                  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

  State if you wish
  this book in English
  or German.

WORTH SENDING FOR

=Dr. J. H. Schenck= has just published a book on

=DISEASES OF THE LUNGS and HOW THEY CAN CURED=, which he offers to
send =FREE=, post-paid, to all applicants. _It contains valuable
information_ for all who suppose themselves afflicted with, or
liable to any disease of the throat or lungs. _Mention this paper._

=Dr. J. H. SCHENCK & SON=, Philadelphia.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             MANHATTAN

                     LIFE INS. CO. OF NEW YORK

                      _156 and 158 Broadway_.


                        THIRTY-THIRD YEAR.


  DESCRIPTION—One of the oldest, strongest, best.

  POLICIES—Incontestable, non-forfeitable, definite cash
    surrender values.

  RATES—Safe, low, and participating or not, as desired.

  RISKS carefully selected.

  PROMPT, liberal dealing.

GENERAL AGENTS AND CANVASSERS WANTED in desirable territory, to
whom permanent employment and liberal compensation will be given.

Address

                                         H. STOKES, President.

  H. Y. WEMPLE, Sec’y.
  S. N. STEBBINS, Act’y.
  J. L. HALSEY, 1st V.-P.
  H. B. STOKES, 2d V.-P.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                 J. & R. LAMB, 59 Carmine Street.

                  Sixth Ave. cars pass the door.

                          [Illustration]

                              BANNERS

                             IN SILK,

                           NEW DESIGNS.

                         CHURCH FURNITURE.

                    SEND FOR HAND BOOK BY MAIL.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       HARPER’S PERIODICALS.

                             Per Year:

  HARPER’S MAGAZINE                                         $4.00
  HARPER’S WEEKLY                                            4.00
  HARPER’S BAZAR                                             4.00
  The THREE above publications                              10.00
  Any TWO above named                                        7.00
  HARPER’S YOUNG PEOPLE                                      1.50
  HARPER’S MAGAZINE    }                                     5.00
  HARPER’S YOUNG PEOPLE}
  HARPER’S FRANKLIN SQUARE LIBRARY. One Year (52 numbers)   10.00

_Postage Free to all subscribers in the United States or Canada._

The Volumes of the WEEKLY and BAZAR begin with the first numbers
for January, the Volumes of the YOUNG PEOPLE with the first number
for November, and the Volumes of the MAGAZINE with the Numbers for
June and December of each year.

Subscriptions will be entered with the Number of each Periodical
current at the time of receipt of order, except in cases where the
subscriber otherwise directs.

Specimen copy of HARPER’S YOUNG PEOPLE sent on receipt of a
three-cent stamp.

  HARPER’S FRANKLIN SQUARE LIBRARY: A weekly publication,
  containing works of Travel, Biography, History, Fiction and
  Poetry, at prices ranging from 10 to 25 cents per number. Full
  list of _Harper’s Franklin Square Library_ will be furnished
  gratuitously on application to HARPER & BROTHERS.

Remittances should be made by Post Office Money Order or Draft, to
avoid risk of loss. Address

                          HARPER & BROTHERS, Franklin Square, N.Y.

☞ HARPER’S CATALOGUE, of between three and four
thousand volumes, mailed on receipt of Nine Cents in postage
stamps.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          [Illustration]

           How to Build a House with little or no Money.

HOW TO BUILD A HOUSE, contains most approved designs for Villas,
Farm Houses, Cottages, and Suburban Residences, ranging in cost
from $350 to $20,000. 1 Vol., large quarto, 178 illustrations.
Price =50= cts.

BARNS AND OUTHOUSES, (Just Published) contains most practical
designs for Farm Barns, Stock Barns, Carriage Houses, Stables,
Dairies, Hog Houses, Chicken Houses, Artificial Rearing Apparatus,
Corn Cribs, Granaries, Smoke Houses, Ice Houses, Bee Houses, Summer
Houses, Bird Houses, Hot Beds, Green Houses, Graperies, How to
lay out Farms and Gardens, designs for Lawn and Hanging Baskets,
Garden Vases, Fountains, and valuable illustrated articles on Cheap
Houses, Concrete Buildings, How to improve old Barns, etc. 1 Vol.,
large quarto, 200 illustrations, Price =50= cents.

“The wonder is that publications of this kind have not been
issued before.”—_N.Y. Weekly Witness._ “Precisely meets a want
which thousands have felt.”—_N.Y. Observer._ “The most practical
book we have ever seen.”—_Episcopal Methodist_. “A responsible
Association.”—_Christian at Work._—

These books must be seen to be appraised—a mere circular or
catalogue can give no idea of their value. On receipt of =$1.00=
we send both books, post-paid, _for examination_. Both or either
can be returned, if not entirely satisfactory and the money will
be immediately refunded. Address, =Co-operative Building Plan
Association= (_Mention this Paper._)

                           24 Beekman St., (Box 2702) New York.


       *       *       *       *       *


                            SKIN HUMORS

                          CAN BE CURED BY

                       GLENN’S SULPHUR SOAP.


                                 SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 16, 1883.

_Mr. C. N. Crittenton_:

DEAR SIR: I wish to call your attention to the good your Sulphur
Soap has done me. For nearly fourteen years I have been troubled
with a skin humor resembling salt rheum. I have spent nearly a
small fortune for doctors and medicine, but with only temporary
relief. I commenced using your “Glenn’s Sulphur Soap” nearly two
years ago—=used it in baths and as a toilet soap daily=. =My skin
is now as clear as an infant’s, and no one would be able to tell
that I ever had a skin complaint.= I would not be without the soap
if it cost five times the amount.

Yours respectfully.
                                                 M. H. MORRIS.

LICK HOUSE, San Francisco, Cal.

The above testimonial is indisputable evidence that Glenn’s Sulphur
Soap will eliminate poisonous skin Diseases WHEN ALL OTHER MEANS
HAVE FAILED. To this fact thousands have testified; and that it
will banish lesser afflictions, such as common PIMPLES, ERUPTIONS
and SORES, and keep the skin clear and beautiful, is absolutely
certain. For this reason ladies whose complexions have been
improved by the use of this soap NOW MAKE IT A CONSTANT TOILET
APPENDAGE. The genuine always bears the name of C. N. CRITTENTON,
115 Fulton Street, New York, sole proprietor. For sale by all
druggists or mailed to any address on receipt of 30 cents in
stamps, or three cakes for 75 cents.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                          [Illustration]

                      The Great Church LIGHT.

                 *       *       *       *       *

=FRINK’S Patent Reflectors= give the =Most Powerful=, the
=Softest=, =Cheapest= and the =Best= Light known for Churches,
Stores, Show Windows, Parlors, Banks, Offices, Picture Galleries,
Theatres, Depots, etc. New and elegant designs. Send size of room.
Get circular and estimate. A liberal discount to churches and the
trade.

                               I. P. FRINK, 551 Pearl St., N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          [Illustration]

                        PEARLS IN THE MOUTH

                       Beauty and Fragrance

                 Are communicated to the mouth by

                             SOZODONT

which renders the _teeth pearly white_, the gums rosy, and the
_breath sweet_. By those who have used it, it is regarded as an
indispensable adjunct of the toilet. It thoroughly _removes tartar_
from the teeth, without injuring the enamel.

                         SOLD BY DRUGGISTS

                            EVERYWHERE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          [Illustration]

                    CHEAPEST BOOK IN THE WORLD.


The New American Dictionary, Price Only $1.00 CONTAINS 1,000
ENGRAVINGS AND 100 PAGES MORE THAN ANY OTHER BOOK OF THE KIND
EVER PUBLISHED. This useful and elegant volume is a Library and
Encyclopedia of general knowledge, as well as the best Dictionary
in the world. Superbly bound in cloth and gilt. No pocket
affair, but a large volume. It contains every useful word in the
English language, with its true meaning, derivation, spelling
and pronunciation, and a vast amount of absolutely necessary
information upon Science, Mythology, Biography, American History,
Insolvent, Land and Interest Laws, etc., being a =Perfect Library
of Reference=. Webster’s Dictionary costs $9.00, and the New
American Dictionary costs only $1.00.

                     Read what the Press Says:

“We have examined the New American Dictionary and find it is a
very valuable book.”—HOUSE AND HOME. “We have never seen its equal
either in price, finish or contents.”—THE ADVOCATE. “Worth ten
times the money.”—TRIBUNE AND FARMER. “A perfect Dictionary and
library of reference.”—LESLIE ILLUSTRATED NEWS. “We have frequent
occasion to use the New American Dictionary in our office, and
regard it well worth the price.”—CHRISTIAN UNION. “With the New
American Dictionary in the library for reference, many other
much more expensive works can be dispensed with, and ignorance
of his country, history, business, law, etc., is inexcusable
in any man.”—SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. “A valuable addition to any
library.”—N.Y. SUN. “There is more real worth than in most books
at ten times the cost.”—N.Y. COMMERCIAL WORLD. Note the price.
=$1.00=, post paid; =2= copies for =$1.75=.

Extraordinary Offer. If any person will get up a Club of Ten, at
$1.00 each, we will send Free as a premium the American Waterbury
Stem Winding Watch. For a =Club of 15= we will send free a Solid
Silver Hunting Case Watch. For a =Club of 30= we will send free a
Lady’s Solid Gold Hunting Case Watch. For a =Club of 50= we will
send free a Gent’s Solid Gold Hunting Case Watch. Send a Dollar at
once for a sample copy. You can easily secure one of these watches
in a day or two, or during your leisure time evenings. As to our
reliability, we can refer to the commercial agencies or any express
company in this city. Address

         WORLD MANUFACTURING CO., 122 Nassau Street, New York.

                          [Illustration]

                          THIS SPLENDID
                     COIN SILVER HUNTING CASE
                            WATCH FREE

           To any person who will send us an order for

                   15 New AMERICAN DICTIONARIES

                        At One Dollar Each.

Any person can readily secure Fifteen Subscribers in one or two
hours, or in a single evening. If you want a good SOLID COIN SILVER
WATCH, and want to get it WITHOUT MONEY, you can easily do so. Send
ONE DOLLAR for a sample copy of the NEW AMERICAN DICTIONARY, and
see how easily you can get up a club of FIFTEEN.

If you don’t care to get up a club yourself, will you kindly hand
this to some person whom you think would like to get the watch. 48
page illustrated catalogue FREE. Send money by registered letter or
P. O. money order. Send all orders to WORLD MANUFACTURING CO., 122
Nassau Street, New York.

  OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR OF THE TREASURY. POST-OFFICE DEPARTMENT,}
  WASHINGTON, D.C., Jan. 29, 1883.                              }


WORLD MANUFACTURING CO.:

The New American Dictionary ordered Jan. 15 at hand. I obtained
fourteen subscribers in about as many minutes last Saturday, and
find the Post-Office Department is a good field to work in. The
book proves to be just the thing for office use. I have many more
promised, and will send another larger order. Send the Silver Watch
as premium for this club. Respectfully,

                                                  ROBERT H. WOOD.

                                                  April 30, 1883.
WORLD MANUFACTURING CO.:

Inclosed find money order for Ten Dollars, as part payment for

  27 New American Dictionaries, at $1 each      $27.00
  6 Bible Dictionaries, at $1.40 each             8.40
  23 Shakespeares, at $1.50 each                 34.50
                                                ------
                                     Total      $69.90

Will pay balance of bill at express office. Please send the $50
Domestic Sewing Machine for my premium. The books sell readily, and
give satisfaction. Will send you a larger order soon.

  Yours truly,
                                STELLA S. BECKWITH, McHenry, Ill.

                                                  April 30, 1883.
WORLD MANUFACTURING CO.:

GENTLEMEN: Find inclosed One Hundred and Ten Dollars for 100 New
American Dictionaries. Send Bible Dictionaries and Shakespeare’s
Works for the extra ten dollars. I will take the $50 Domestic
Sewing Machine and the Gold Watch for my premiums. I sent you Fifty
Dollars last month, and will send you more orders soon. Ship books
at once, and oblige

              CHARLES O’DONNELL, New Tacoma, Washington Territory.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    7 PER CENT. to 8 PER CENT.

                     Interest Net to Investors

                    In First Mortgage Bonds ON

                         IMPROVED FARMS in

                          Iowa, Minnesota

                            and Dakota,

                            SECURED BY

                        ORMSBY BROS. & CO.,

                  BANKERS, LOAN AND LAND BROKERS,

                         EMMETSBURG, IOWA.


          _11 Years’ Experience. Loans Absolutely Safe._

        References and Circulars forwarded on Application.


            _BRANCH BANKS AT MITCHELL AND HURON, D. T._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      PAYSON’S INDELIBLE INK,

                   FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

[Illustration:

  SMITH
  AMERICAN
  ORGANS]

                           ARE THE BEST.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at

  BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
  LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
  KANSAS CITY, Mo., 817 Main Street;
  ATLANTA, GA., 27 Whitehall Street;
  Or, DEFIANCE, O.


                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  THE
  RISING SUN
  STOVE POLISH]

    For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil,
    For freeness from dust and slowness to soil,
    And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed,
    And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

    Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
    The half risen sun every package should bear;
    For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use,
    And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           THE PSALTER,

             For Responsive Reading in Public Worship.

                    BY REV. R. S. STORRS, D.D.,

Pastor of the Church of the Pilgrims, Brooklyn, N.Y.

In addition to the collection of Psalms, this Psalter contains
selections, not only from the Messianic prophets, but from the
poetry of the Books of Job, from the Proverbs, from Ecclesiastes,
and one or two from the Book of Revelations. The following order of
arrangement has been adopted, viz.:


                            THE PSALMS.

I.—The Preparation of the Spirit for Divine Worship. II.—The
worship of God for His goodness and majesty. III.—The worship
of God for the Kingship of His Son. IV.—The worship of God as
defender of His people. V.—The worship of God as Judge on the
earth. VII.—The worship of God for the teaching of His Word.
VII.—Supplication to God for deliverance and favor.


                         OTHER SELECTIONS.

VIII.—Praise to God for His greatness. IX.—God’s purposes
concerning Christ and the Church. X.—The briefness of man’s life.
XI.—The excellence of wisdom. XII.—The glory of the heavenly life.

This edition of the Psalter has been awaited with much interest,
and the knowledge that Dr. Storrs was engaged upon it has given
general satisfaction. The previous work has had a successful life,
having been instrumental, as the pioneer Psalter, in awakening
widespread interest in responsive reading. There were necessarily
some changes to be made in that edition which long use and
experience have suggested. More changes are made in this edition,
and we now have such a Psalter as will fully meet the requirements
of all non-Episcopal churches. It is needless to say that Dr.
Storrs is more eminently fitted to the work of preparing the
Psalter than most men, and the work will undoubtedly be accepted as
the general standard.

The work is furnished for introduction at low rates. Churches using
the old edition may exchange for the new on favorable terms.

A specimen copy will be sent, postpaid, for examination, to any
address, on receipt of 75 cents. Address the publishers.


                      DR. JOSEPH P. HOLBROOK

is by general consent in the front rank to-day of composers
of church music. He is the Musical Editor of “The Songs for
the Church,” “Songs for the Sanctuary,” “Baptist Praise Book,”
“Methodist Hymnal,” “Part Songs,” “Quartet and Chorus Choir,” etc.,
etc.

Holbrook’s tunes have thus become wedded to many, if not most, of
the acceptable hymns now sung. Compilers of hymn and tune books
are eager to secure these tunes, as they find that no book can be
said to be complete without them. Many of Holbrook’s latest tunes
are, however, the best he has made, and he has recently issued a
new book embodying them all, together with a fine collection of the
best English and American tunes. The


                          Worship in Song

contains 700 choice hymns and 500 tunes. In the selection of
hymns Dr. Holbrook has had the colaboration of several eminent
hymnologists, and on account of them alone the book will be found
to be the most acceptable yet published.

The book has been adopted by Presbyterian and Congregational
churches east and west, and adds greatly to the interest in the
worship wherever used. A prominent clergyman in Connecticut says:
“I am much interested in Mr. Holbrook’s book. We use it daily and
enjoy it. I have always thought the success of ‘Songs for the
Sanctuary’ was more due to the musical editing than to anything
else.”

For specimen copies, price post-paid $1.25, which may be returned
after examination, if desired. Address the publishers.


                          JUST PUBLISHED.

               A Liturgy for Non-Episcopal Churches.

A General Liturgy and Book of Common Prayer, prepared by

                          PROF. HOPKINS,

                  Of Auburn Theological Seminary.

CONTENTS.—Table of Scripture Readings for Divine Service on every
Lord’s day in the year. Order of Evening Prayer. Order of Morning
Prayer. Order of S. S. Service (four lessons). S. S. Service for
the Nativity of Jesus. S. S. Service for the Resurrection of Jesus.
Prayers and Collect against unbelief. Second Coming of Christ. For
peace. For pardon against delay of conversion. For protection. For
the unity of the Church. Prayers for travelers. Prayers of St.
Basil. Prayers for the Holy Spirit. For the meeting of a Presbytery
or Synod. Prayer of Balthazar Lydius. For timely repentance. Prayer
of St. Basil, etc. (63 special and general occasions in all). Order
for the administration of infant baptism. Form for administration
of adult baptism. Marriage Services. Funeral Services. Ordination
and installation of Bishops. Prayers at sea. Communion service.
Consecration of a church. Seventeen anniversary Collects, as First
of July, Fourth of July, etc. Twenty-one Collects and prayers from
the Euchologion of the Scottish Church Service Society. The sources
from which these forms have been taken are the Greek Liturgies, the
Sacramentaries of Gelasius, Leo and Gregory, the Mozarabic Missal,
the Monumenta Liturgia from the sixth to the tenth centuries, the
Prymer of the Sarum Use, and to some extent more modern sources,
as the Euchologion of Book of Common Order of the Church Service
Society of Scotland.

Prof. Hopkins has devoted many years to the preparation of this
work, and has submitted portions of it, together with his whole
plan, to his brethren in the Church, meeting their full approval
and indorsement to an unprecedented extent. A copy will be sent for
examination on receipt of $1. Churches wishing to adopt this Prayer
Book may obtain special terms on quantities of 100 copies or more.


                      The Evangelical Hymnal,

                              BY THE

                    REV. CHARLES CUTHBERT HALL,

      Pastor of the 1st Presbyterian Church, Brooklyn, N.Y.,

                                AND

                         SIGISMUND LASAR,

                     Editor of “The Hymnary.”

              This book contains approved versions of

                   Six Hundred Excellent Hymns,

with tunes by the most celebrated composers of ancient and modern
times.

The adaptations of tunes to hymns have been made with a special
reference to a higher standard of ecclesiastical music than may be
found in any other American Hymnal.

The Biographical Index contains brief but comprehensive notices of
authors, translators and composers, and much valuable biographical
information is printed at the heading of each hymn and in frequent
foot notes.

Examination Price, Postpaid, $1.75.

[Illustration] Specimen pages free to any address. A copy of the
work itself will be sent to any pastor or committee desiring to
examine it to be returned if not adopted.

A. S. BARNES & CO., Publishers, 111 and 113 William St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


        ATKIN & PROUT, Printers, 12 Barclay St., New York.

                 *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions silently
corrected. Inconsistent hyphenation retained due to the
multiplicity of authors. Period spellings and author’s grammar
have been retained.

Illustrations have been moved outside of paragraphs, causing page
numbers to be slightly off. The illustration on page 240 differs
between copies of the magazine.

Changed “buriness” to “business” on page 234 (most prominent men in
business).

Changed “acccounts” to “accounts” on page 244 (giving accounts of
his discussions)

Changed “Tallageda” to “Talladega” in the Marblehead entry on page
251.

Changed “Townsend Habor” to “Townsend Harbor” on page 251.

Changed “Talledega” to “Talladega” in the Hancock entry on page 252.

Missing “A” added in “HARPER’S BAZAR” in the table in Harper’s
advertisement on page 254.

Changed “Fragance” to “Fragrance” on page 255 (Beauty and
Fragrance).

Missing “n” added in “Messianic” on the back cover (from the
Messianic prophets).

Missing “i” added in “Kingship” on the back cover (Kingship of His
Son)

Missing “o” added in “for” on the back cover (Prayers for the Holy
Spirit)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 37, NO. 8, AUGUST, 1883 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.