TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE.
  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_ and bold text
  by =equal signs=.




  OLDEST BEE PAPER      ESTABLISHED
    IN AMERICA            IN 1861

  THE AMERICAN
  BEE JOURNAL

  DEVOTED TO SCIENTIFIC BEE-CULTURE
  AND
  THE PRODUCTION AND SALE OF PURE HONEY.

  VOL. XVII.      CHICAGO, ILL., MARCH 23, 1881.      No. 12.




[Illustration:

  OLDEST BEE PAPER          ESTABLISHED
    IN AMERICA                IN 1861

  THE AMERICAN
  BEE JOURNAL
]

Published every Wednesday, by

THOMAS G. NEWMAN, EDITOR AND PROPRIETOR,

974 WEST MADISON ST., CHICAGO, ILL.




TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION:

  WEEKLY—(52 numbers) =$2.00= a year, in advance. Three or Six
  Months at the same rate.

  SEMI-MONTHLY—The first and third numbers of each month, at
  =$1.00= a year, in advance.

  MONTHLY—The first number of each month, at =50 cents= a
  year, in advance.

☞ Any person sending a Club of six is entitled, to an extra copy (like
the club) which may be sent to any address desired. Sample copies
furnished _free_.

☞ Remit by money-order, registered letter, express or bank draft on
Chicago or New York, payable to our order. Such _only_ are at our risk.
Checks on local banks cost us 25 cents for collecting.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Free of postage in the United States or Canada.
  =Postage to Europe 50 cents extra.=

       *       *       *       *       *

  _Entered at Chicago post-office as second class matter._




[Illustration: CORRESPONDENCE.]




  For the American Bee Journal

What is the Royal Jelly?

C. J. ROBINSON.


I propose, by permission, to discuss in the columns of the BEE JOURNAL the
hitherto puzzling problem: “What is royal jelly, that substance known
to produce the transformation of worker larvæ to queens?” Profound
scientists of Europe and this country have delved into the secrets of
the grand problem, but none of them have handed down a satisfactory
solution. Yet, it does not seem rational that the question is so
obstruse as to forever remain past finding out what the so-called royal
jelly consists of; the source from which it is derived; its definite
action on larvæ; and whether it is administered by the workers as a
nourishing aliment to larvæ; in royal cells, or for the purpose of
impregnating the larvæ; (as pistilliferous flowers are impregnated with
pollen) and thus develop a female bee fully qualified to reproduce
males. The settled doctrine of writers on bee-matters is that it is
chiefly due to the excess of food served to the larva by the workers
that produces the transformation from worker to queen. Still no writer
has ventured to assert that such is a demonstrated fact. The late Baron
of Berlepsch, the able expounder of the Dzierzon Theory, and the most
scientific and practical apicultural writer and experienced apiarist in
all Europe, wrote thus:

“Every hypothesis, however, yet submitted from any quarter, rest
chiefly upon the assumption that the development (of fertile workers
and queens) has by some means been over-stimulated for a brief period,
and as the result affects the sexual organs more especially, the
quantity and quality of the food administered has been looked to as the
exciting cause.”

If his assumption be admitted then individual female bees are
very likely to be reproduced imperfectly developed in all the
degrees between a rudimentary fertile worker up to a perfect queen.
Furthermore, were it true that development depends on quantity of food
or the over-stimulating caused by high feeding, the workers would
be able to supply themselves with queens at all times; when on the
contrary it is well known that workers cannot always perfect queens
when furnished with everything necessary for that purpose except the
impregnating principle—semen.

[Illustration: EGGS AND LARVA.]

A full knowledge of the reproduction of the honey bee is of great
importance, and at the very foundation of the science of bee-culture
and of great value to those who intend to breed the superior races of
bees, especially the principles of hybridizing so as to prevent their
deterioration and improve the breeds. And it is of great moment to
the science of entomology to determine whether insects are produced
by parthenogenesis, as is believed, or by semen received by the male
progenitors. As for myself, I have conclusive evidence that such queens
as are reproduced by furnishing a colony of black bees with eggs laid
by an Italian queen, is in some degree hybridized.

All of the points in the “Dzierzon Theory” have been demonstrated
except his theory of the reproduction of bees, particularly drones and
queens. It seems that he was sorely puzzled in his profound research to
comprehend the laws involved in the strange phenomena—virgin queens
reproducing male bees—and to dispose of the (to him) inexplicable
point in his colossal theory, he jumped at a conclusion which was
based upon the hypothetical doctrine advanced by Professors Von
Seibold, Leuckart, and Dr. Donhoff, the fathers of the theory called
“Parthenogenesis,” that is procreating without male sperm. It was
during the period that Dr. Dzierzon was making public his theory that
Mr. Elihu Kirby, of Henrietta, N. Y., attempted to make known the
result of his long-time and attentive research into the principles
of reproduction of the different races of honey bees. He was a
scientific apiarist of long experience, and enthusiastic in the cause
of progressive bee-culture. Not until 1861 was there published or
circulated in this country a periodical devoted to bee affairs and
scarcely no attention was given to scientific bee-culture at that
time. Mr. K. communicated to the AMERICAN BEE JOURNAL at different
times just after its advent, the discoveries he had made relative to
the reproduction of bees, but not much attention was given it further
than a brief notice by the editor, the lamented Samuel Wagner, who,
like the great Dzierzon, seemed not to comprehend the evolution of the
reproduction of insects.

During the period of 1859–63, Mr. Kirby was in failing health, and when
in the summer of 1863, he was about to bid adieu to his long-cherished
theme and go from the altar of home on earth to a heavenly inheritance,
he besought me to further his designs and he committed to my charge his
new theory of the reproduction of drones and female bees. The result
of the case thus consigned to me is as follows, conclusions that I
have come to derive from careful observations for many seasons, viz.,
_videlicet_.

To produce drones the workers fecundate the worker larvæ in royal
cells with drone’s semen, which gives the elements of queens. The
workers supply the said larva with animal secretion, water, bee-bread
and honey, until it secretes sufficient material for a queen, and
when the larva arrives at maturity it is then metamorphosed to an egg
substance, from thence it passes to a chrysalis state, and in the
pupa state her ovary is formed and impregnated with semen retained in
the larva state imparting the elements of life. She then leaves her
cell and is prepared to lay eggs that produce drones only, without
further fecundation, and when the drones are matured from their natural
genital propensities deposit their semen in the queen’s spermatheca to
enable her to fecundate her full grown eggs to produce workers, and
also deposit semen where the workers can obtain it in the abscence
of the drones, to perfect queens, and for storing it in their combs,
where it retains its vitality at least from the time that the drones
are expelled until they are reproduced the following season. It is
ascertained that the drones and queens can be hybridized by their drone
progenitors in the embryo state, which is conclusive evidence of their
being fecundated with drones’ semen.

To produce workers the drones deposit their sperm in the queen’s
spermatheca while on the wing (and on top, clasping the drone’s back to
herself) and from thence she fecundates full grown eggs, as they pass
the mouth of her spermatheca on the way out of her oviduct, and by the
combining of the elements of the drone and worker in one, by which the
worker is produced. Thus, there can be no logical reasoning in saying
that the workers are produced by semen, and the drones and queens are
produced without semen.

To produce queens the worker fecundates the worker larvæ in royal cells
with drone’s semen which gives the elements of the drone, worker and
queen, combined in one, in the larval state; it secretes in its growth
the proper material for perfect queens, and when the larva arrives at
maturity it is transformed to an egg-form, and then to a chrysalis, and
in that state her embryo ovary is formed and impregnates in the upper
points or sacks of her ovary, and contains the elements of myriads of
drone egg germs before leaving her cell, and her physiology is changed
in her transition from the chrysalis state to a perfect queen, and is
qualified before leaving her cell to lay eggs that will produce drones
only. To be fully qualified to produce workers she must receive a
deposit of semen from the drone in her spermatheca. If once filled with
semen it is efficacious through life, and qualifies her to fecundate
the full grown drone eggs as they pass the mouth of her spermatheca,
and causes them to produce workers, and to lay all the eggs, both male
and female and workers, that the colony may require. It is ascertained
that the embryo drone, workers and queen can each be hybridized in
the ovary, egg or larva state, which is communicated to the whole
production. I think the evidence conclusive in the reproduction of
the queen. The fertile workers are produced by the workers taking the
drone’s semen into their stomachs, and from thence it is transmitted
to their embryo ovary, and fecundates it, which gives the elements
of life to the progeny, and qualifies them to lay eggs which produce
drones only, unless the eggs are further fecundated by being brought
into contact with semen. It appears that the young queen’s ovary on
leaving her cell, and the ovary of the fertile worker when fecundated,
are identical in the production of drone eggs. Therefore, the evidence
is that semen is the agent in both cases.

I wish to call attention particularly to the following points: 1st. The
embryo ovary of young queens must be fructified before she leaves her
cell with drone’s semen, which gives the elements of life to her drone
progeny, and forms the basis for the whole progeny of bees. To produce
the 3 sexes of bees there are 3 distinct fecundations. 1st. The embryo
ovary of the pupa queen to produce the drones. 2d. The full grown egg
to produce the workers. 3d. The worker larva is fecundated by the
workers with semen, given off by the drones to produce the queens. And
all in the larval state the secrete sufficient material to perfect in
their transition either drones, workers or queens, and they each can be
hybridized in the embryo state.

2d. In the reproduction of bees there are 2 distinct egg forms: 1st.
The eggs that produce the larva. 2d. The larva when it arrives at
maturity is transformed to an egg substance, of which it forms the
chrysalis that produces the perfect bees and their sexes.

3d. It requires 3 states of existence to perfect the organism of bees.
1st. The larva. 2d. The chrysalis. 3d. The perfect bee. The queen first
deposits her eggs in the proper cells or utricals in which the larva
is hatched and supplied by the workers with animal secretion and food
until their transition to an egg substance or chrysalis.

I will propose the following question for consideration: What is it
that is found in the royal jelly that is possessed of such impregnating
powers as to cause the ovaries of the workers to produce drone eggs?

Richford, N. Y., March 14, 1881.




  For the American Bee Journal.

Putting Wires into Comb Foundation.

J. G. WHITTEN.


Mr. John F. Cowan, in his article on “The Practical use of Foundation,”
published in the BEE JOURNAL of March 9, says: “It has been practically
demonstrated to my satisfaction that these results can only be obtained
by Mr. Given’s method of introducing the wires, and if by a happy
combination the Dunham foundation could be made and wired by the Given
or a similar process, the foundation controversy would be virtually
ended.”

I would like to say to Mr. Cowan and others who may be interested, that
last season I hived about 40 full sized natural colonies, on Dunham
foundation, in Quinby frames, prepared in the following manner: The
frame is wired by sewing in 2 horizontal wires, spaced off so that
there will be 3 equal spaces from the top bar down. I use a triangular
top bar and fasten the foundation by pressing it down to the bar with
the thumb and then running a stream of melted wax and rosin over it.
Then by running a wheel, made of a cent, over the wire I imbed the
wire into the foundation; this also forms a groove in the foundation
in which I run a stream of melted wax which covers the wire, and
when drawn out will be perfect and will neither sag nor break out by
extracting. There should be a good half inch of space between the
foundation and bottom bar, as it will settle enough to bulge the comb
if left full length. To give it a thorough trial I hived 2 heavy
natural colonies in one hive with the mercury at 90 in the shade and
basswood honey coming in very fast, and when drawn out every comb was
perfect. By bending a spoon so that it will pour a small stream and
with a little practice, you will find it a short task to fasten the
foundation in the frames.

Genoa, N. Y., March 14, 1881.




  For the American Bee Journal.

Importing Bees from Italy.

CHAS. DADANT.


Mr. A. Salisbury, under the above heading, says that “It is no longer
a question: the Italian bee of Italy is not a distinct race.... Later
investigation proves the fact that there are black bees in Italy, as
anywhere else, even in the vicinity of Rome itself.”

Mr. Jones, at the Convention in Cincinnati last fall, asserted that he
had seen black bees at several places in Italy, even in the vicinity
of Rome. All my inquiries, as well as the reports of prominent and
disinterested bee-keepers of Italy, such as Mr. Mona and Dr. Dubini,
prove that there are no hybrid bees in Italy, and, of course, no black
bees.

Will Mr. Jones tell us in which apiaries he saw black bees? Of course,
by black bees we understand entire colonies of black bees. Then, he saw
also colonies of hybrid bees, for the mixing could not be prevented.
But if Mr. Jones saw only a few black, or _seemingly black_ bees, in a
colony, this circumstance, caused either by the dark contents of their
stomachs, or by some other accidental cause, we cannot infer from it
that there are black or impure bees in Italy. I hope that Mr. Jones
will answer this question.

Mr. Jones adds that, in his opinion, the Italian bees were descended
from the bees of Holy Land, or those on the Island of Cyprus. Such an
opinion raises the question: Are the yellow bees from Cyprus, from
Syria, or from Italy, the original bees; or the black bees, of more
northern climates, the original bees, the yellow color being only an
improvement?

According to the law of natural selection, the yellow bees of these
three countries are about similar, because the three countries enjoy a
mild climate. The idea of Mr. Jones’ that the Italian bees descended
from the bees of Cyprus or of Syria, cannot be sustained, for it leads
to the idea of large importations of bees from these countries, into
Italy, at a time when the means of transportation were few, long and
difficult.

The introduction of a few colonies of these bees into Italy would have
been unable to effect the smallest change in the race then existing;
for by our introduction of Italian bees we have experienced how hard
it is to overcome the returning to the type which is prevalent in a
country. Besides, although we have had too little time to study the
habits of the Cyprian bees, having received our queens last summer
only, we have noticed that, while they resemble in color the Italian,
their habits are not the same. For instance, the Cyprian bees do not
cling to the combs as persistently as do the Italians, and resemble
more the blacks in this respect; the Cyprian queens, like the common
queens, are more easily frightened, and more difficult to find, than
the Italian queens.

As to their other qualities we are unable to say anything. It will take
a few seasons to test them thoroughly. It is, therefore, desirable to
see them tested by a great number of bee-keepers in comparison with
Italian bees.

I read in the Italian bee paper, _L’Apicoltore_, for January, just
received, that the Central Society of Italian Bee-Keepers will have an
exhibition on the first of May, to which the bee-keepers are invited
to send bees from every part of the country (probably to answer the
assertion of Mr. Jones, that there are black bees in Italy), in order
to compare the varieties which can exist on the entire peninsula. The
report of the commission of this society will thus put an end to the
discussions between those who contend that there are black bees in
Italy, and those who say that the Italian bees are all pure. Yet, it
is well to remember here, that in Italy, as well as in Germany, they
count but two yellow rings; for they do not count as a ring the first
segment, to which the thorax is attached.

Hamilton, Ill., Feb. 5, 1881.




  For the American Bee Journal.

Bees and Grapes.

REV. M. MAHIN, D. D.


I notice that the question whether bees destroy sound grapes is again
being discussed. I have been a bee-keeper for 11 years and during most
of that time have raised grapes enough for family use, and I have given
considerable time and attention to the question under discussion. All
my observations go to show that bees do not puncture sound grapes. I
have seen them sucking the juice from grapes that had been broken by
birds, and have picked off the broken grape, and watched the result.
The bees would run about over the bunch hunting for an opening, and
finally abandon the search. Last season a great many grapes were
destroyed or injured in this part of the country, and I gave the matter
special attention. Many of the grapes cracked more or less from the
effects of rains following dry weather, and many more were broken more
or less by birds. As forage was scarce the bees worked industriously on
these broken grapes until they were all gone. But on all the bunches
there were some grapes that were not broken, and these remained on the
vines until late in the season. After the juice had been sucked from
all the broken skins I saw the bees for many days vainly searching
for openings from which they might obtain the supplies they had been
accustomed to draw from the broken fruit. These sound grapes remained
on the vines, in some cases, for weeks after the bees had ceased to
get anything from the broken ones. Now it is plain that the juice of
these very ripe grapes would have been quite as acceptable to them as
that from the ones they are accused of having punctured and destroyed.
And to my mind it is clear that if they had punctured and destroyed as
many as they are accused of doing, they would not have become suddenly
reformed as the grapes became sweeter and more delicious. I will not
affirm that the bees cannot puncture the skin of a grape, but I do
affirm that as far as my very careful observation enables me to judge,
they do not. And if I am correct in this the injury done to the grapes
is very small. The injured grapes would spoil in a few days if the bees
were not to touch them.

As far as I have been able to observe wasps, hornets, &c., do little
injury to grapes. The mischief results mostly from the cracking of the
skin, by a very few days, even, of wet weather after it has been dry
for some time. The skin of the grapes becomes so full that a jar from
the wind or from the alighting of a bird on the bunch, will cause them
to crack, and then, if there is a dearth of honey, they are sure to be
sucked dry by the bees, with more or less help from yellow jackets,
hornets, and wasps. It is possible that in some cases the skins are cut
by wasps, &c., but I think the cases are exceptional.

Huntington, Ind., March 4, 1881.




  For the American Bee Journal.

The Use of Separators for Box Honey.

GREINER BROTHERS.


In starting an apiary it is of great importance to adopt a hive that
will prove satisfactory to the manager, in all its features, for the
present as well as for the future. It is not an easy matter after an
apiary has been started and hives and appliances have accumulated,
to change the sizes or dimensions of such, if they should not be
satisfactory. In the different manifestations of the hive we find that
it is necessary to have brood frames and sections interchangeable, in
fact, it is still more convenient to have all the different parts of
the hives as uniform as mechanical workmanship can produce them, so
that frames, honey-boards, division-boards, covers, sections, mats,
&c., may be picked up anywhere and adjusted to any hive desired.

The use of separators is another feature of this kind; if once adopted
and the bees arranged accordingly, it may cause considerable trouble
to remodel a lot of appliances, especially if separators of any
perceptible thickness are used.

In the BEE JOURNAL for Feb. 2, Mr. Heddon gives some very good hints on
“hive and section making,” but we can not endorse all his points, and
in this article we refer in particular to his closing sentence.

It seems strange to us that Mr. Heddon pronounces separators
“nuisances,” whilst other prominent bee-keepers, and we believe the
majority, use them and advocate their use. It must certainly be a query
to young beginners, who seek information amongst the contributors of
the JOURNAL, to encounter such square contradictions. Our experience is
about as follows:

The 2 first years of our experience in bee-keeping found us equipped
with open surplus cases, we mean by surplus cases the adjustable
half-story, with the proper number of frames containing sections. The
seasons were good and the crops abundant, but the shape of a good
share of our honey was anything but desirable; it was not uniform in
thickness nor even; some being thick on one end and thin on the other,
some were missed entirely, whilst the adjoining one bulged out to take
up the space; in short, the variations were many.

To glass and crate this honey for market cost us considerable trouble
and we concluded to try separators. The 25 cases we had prepared and
used the next season at our honey apiary proved to be a success; the
honey was “just splendid;” the sections in shape, thickness and weight
were as near perfect as could be desired, and we decided at once to
produce honey in no other way. However, we were not entirely satisfied;
we knew separators were objected to by some bee-keepers on account of
a smaller yield. Mr. Heddon says, on page 33 of the JOURNAL, “These
separators cost me too great a portion of my surplus crop.”

To satisfy ourselves on this point we used the following season about
100 cases, rigged as the first 25, with separators, which we scattered
in our different apiaries side by side with open ones. The result
was that we noticed very little difference, if any, in the amount of
honey stored, and the editor’s opinion, on page 59, was exactly our
experience.

Again, Mr. Heddon claims the first cost and trouble of manipulating to
be objectionable. We admit separators are an expense, but they need
not be very costly. We use basswood, costing us less than a cent each,
and even at twice that cost, would it not be economy then to expend
a comparative small amount if we can thereby produce honey in much
more attractive shape? Besides we claim separators lessen the trouble
of manipulating instead of increasing it. The reason we use wood is
because it is cheaper than metal and we believe better adapted, on
account of its being the most natural material for bee-habitations.

Since we introduced separators the percentage of unfinished honey is
greatly reduced. At the end of the honey season we formerly found
open cases almost filled with comb and honey and not one single
finished section among them. This is not so much the case since we
use separators; when the flow of honey begins to diminish, we have
noticed our bees to be at work in a portion of the sections, whilst the
remainder would not be occupied at all; we have also taken off cases
at the end of a honey flow, which were entirely empty, except 2 or 3
sections, and these were finished and marketable. To be sure these are
extremes, but it shows the benefit of separators.

It might appear from the last part of this article, that we apply
surplus cases regardless of the working capacity of our colonies.
Circumstances may sometimes compel us to do so, but we aim to give our
bees no more surplus room than they can occupy.

Naples, N. Y., March 6, 1881.




  For the American Bee Journal.

Texas for Bees and Honey.

DR. J. E. LAY.


I write to answer several communications in regard to the adaptability
of our great State to bee-keeping, and as apiculture is engrossing
the minds of many of the most energetic, progressive and scientific
men of our land, I recognize the difficulty of even venturing an
opinion. As our great State is so varied in climate and flora, I will
state that my remarks have reference to my own section of perhaps a
radius of 100 miles. I have lived in Texas since 1850. I passed my
boyhood days on her beautiful prairies, amid her thousands of flowers
of every hue, freighting our incomparable sea breeze with more than
Arcadian sweetness, silence banished from her woodland slopes by the
joyous carol of beautiful song birds. Ever delighting in the marvelous
beauties of nature, how could I fail to love so beauteous a sunlit
home? Yes, and as a grown up boy I love it still. Greek nor Roman,
not even Wm. Tell, loved his country better than I, therefore my
bee-keeping friends will pardon me if I seem to color a little too
strongly. Our State is being filled with energetic farmers who are
reaping rich harvests from the virgin soil, for nearly all kinds of
seeds that are sown spring forth under the genial rays of the sun to 60
and an hundred fold.

Reasoning by analogy I opine that bee-keeping will result in like
manner. Apiculture is in its nascent form here, but the sun of science
begins to warm its quickening form. I have studied the best works on
apiculture, but have not given it a thorough practical test yet; I
purpose doing so this season. There are but few bees in our country,
all blacks except my little apiary of 7 colonies, which consists of
hybrids and blacks. I intend to Italianize in March, for they indeed
possess many advantages over the blacks.

I have just wintered successfully in simplicity hives (plain) without
any sort of protection whatever, and this is the coldest winter I
ever saw in Texas. Dispatches state that at this time almost the
entire North is covered with snow. While my bees were in a quiver of
excitement to-day, Feb. 4, bringing in rich loads of pollen and honey
from turnips, mustards, &c., I could but delight in their rush of joy.
How different is the climate over which our vast brotherhood reaches!
Our honey plants reach nearly through the entire year, yielding as
good nectar as ever tickled the palate of man. In fact the harvest for
bees is almost endless, better, of course, some months. The market for
honey has never been developed: a few old “gums” to “rob” for “big
meeting” or for some extraordinary visitor is about all ever obtained.
“Bees do no good here these days, the moth destroy them,” say the “old
settlers.” The moth skulks away in the light of scientific bee-keeping
and its depredations are _nil_.

To be successful all should study the science, read good books on the
subject, learn by close practical observation, read the periodicals
of our wide awake bee-men, among which there is none better than the
AMERICAN BEE JOURNAL. Energy and perseverance alone will succeed even
in the “sunlit clime” of Texas. Without these, all will just as surely
retrograde.

Hallettsville, Texas.




  For the American Bee Journal.

Alsike Clover as a Honey Plant.

L. JAMES.


Much has been written for the JOURNAL about the value of this variety
of clover for its yield of honey and hay. Such has not been my
experience with it, sown on 19 acres of land, and extending over 11
years. In 1869 I bought some 38 pounds of the seed of Mr. Thomas, of
Canada. The cost to me, of the seed, duty and express charges, was $18.
Having 9 acres of ground planted with apple trees that had been bearing
for some time, and wishing to seed it down to grass I had the ground
well prepared for the reception of the seed, and a good rain fell just
after it was brushed in; it came up nicely, and as there was favorable
rains all through the summer it grew finely. The following season it
grew in length of stem and quantity of bloom far beyond my expectation,
and when in its full bloom it was a beautiful sight, resembling an
ocean of blossoms, and as I looked upon it, you may rely upon it my
calculations of boxes of nice alsike clover honey loomed up in large
proportions, but like many another calculation based upon what our bees
are going to do, it was all in fancy and I was doomed to disappointment.

Day after day their flight was just in the opposite direction, with
only here and there a bee to be seen on it. There was a body of timber
¾ of a mile distant in the direction they were flying with pastures
well set in white clover between this timber and the apiary, and I
supposed the white clover pastures was the source of honey supply. This
state of things continued for some time, and seeing a bee-man pass by
that lived in the timber I inquired how his bees were getting along.
He replied they were doing finely as they ought to, for he had never
seen heavier honey dews. That was the secret, and soon my boxes began
to show evidence of the dark stuff being put into them, instead of
alsike honey. Fortunately for me, before much of it was stored in the
boxes, some heavy dashing rains washed it from the leaves and there
was no more of the dew for them to gather. The alsike and white clover
were in bloom for some time after this, but for some cause the bees
paid but little attention to it, and I was vexed to see the promise
of a rich return for my expenditure frustrated. I took it for granted
that the season was not congenial for its production of honey, as I
knew the same to be the case with white clover, as it was last summer.
After this at different times I sowed 2 other orchards of 5 acres each
with alsike, neither of which did as well as the first piece sown,
want of timely rains, &c., being the cause, but by continuous sowing I
succeeded in having them tolerably well set with it.

Receiving no perceptible benefit from it, commensurate with its trouble
and expense, I have for some time been satisfied that in central
Illinois where our white clover is so abundantly furnished in our
pastures and road sides, without any expense, and hardy at that, it is
time and money put to a poor use.

As a hay producing plant it amounts to but little after the first
season, as it becomes dwarfed in habit, and, I believe, will eventually
be but little larger in growth under like circumstances than the white
variety. The white clover is the honey plant for our latitude, and I
presume the alsike for Sweden, from whence it came, and corresponding
latitudes. After having had 11 years’ experience with it I think it
unworthy of attention from bee-men, either for honey or hay; at least
where the hardy white clover comes spontaneously to our hands.

There is one thing I ought not to omit, in sowing this Canadian seed I
introduced a kind of cockle (different from any I have seen in Penn. or
Ohio) that holds its own much better than the clover, and I begin to
think it will be a standing pest difficult to get rid of.

Atlanta, Ill.




  Read before the N. E. Convention.

The Supply and Queen Trade.

A. B. WEED.


This is a subject, I believe, of interest to all who are engaged in
apiculture, either as bee-keepers, supply dealers or queen breeders,
and is growing as the business extends.

The supply business seems as yet to be in a crude state, and prices
lack uniformity. In many cases we find needless “cutting” of prices. It
may be said that this is a good thing for buyers; but I believe that
the opposite is the case, for the inevitable result of unreasonably
low prices is inferior goods. When prices are so lowered that there is
no margin left for profit, the trade will not be supported with the
enterprise which is necessary to stimulate improvements or inventions,
or even to put the business on a good footing. The character of the
business can best be maintained if the energy of manufacturers is
directed to the perfecting of goods rather than the cheapening of them.
Good tools are necessary in any pursuit, and seem to be associated with
a thrifty business; in fact, the prosperity of a business is largely
dependent upon the means at hand of carrying it on. If one tool is
better than another—even if the difference is slight—it is worth
very much more, for the benefit of the difference is felt every time
that it is used. A good thing may be a source of profit, and a poor one
of loss. The best is _always_ the cheapest.

There is one respect in which the business is in a better condition
than many others, and that is, that there is but very little credit
given. This is an advantage to both parties, for the seller loses
nothing through bad debts, and the prompt buyer does not have to pay
for the losses caused by the careless or dishonest ones.

It is quite common among supply dealers to guarantee safe arrival of
goods. This condition of sale is unnecessary, as the express receipt
is sufficient, and in case of injury or loss the fact is more readily
proven and damages more easily collected than could be from some
dealers. It is unreasonable to expect the dealer to be responsible for
goods after they have left his hands, especially when the consignee can
adjust any difficulty more easily at his end of the line; this is the
customary rule in business. When articles are sent by mail the buyer
can protect himself against loss by having the article registered;
but the precaution is almost unnecessary, as it is _very rarely_ that
anything is lost in the mails. Of course the sender is required to use
necessary care in packing; with most shippers this is a point of pride.

The traffic in queens seems to be closely allied to the supply
business—at least so I have found it—for as the bee-keeper begins
to feel the need of good tools he sees the advantage of good stock as
well; and he naturally looks in the same direction for both. I believe
that I express the opinion of the best queen breeders when I say that
it is much more satisfactory to sell a good queen at a correspondingly
good price—even if the profit is no greater in proportion—than a
cheap and poor one, for the reason that a queen, wherever she goes,
will represent the stock from which she came. And I believe, too, that
I speak the opinion of all observing apiarists when I say that it pays
infinitely better to keep good queens than poor ones. Thus it is that
good queens at good prices are more profitable to both parties. Some
of the best apiarists have discontinued selling any queens that are
not possessed of a high degree of merit, and send out only those which
are thoroughly tested and found to be good. In return they receive a
suitable price from appreciative customers. This is notably the case
in localities where honey raising is an established business, and
the value of good stock is therefore understood. It is now almost
universally held by apiarists that if good queens are to be obtained
they must be raised under favorable conditions. It is freely admitted
that to bring about these conditions requires a large outlay of time
and thought, as well as money. This especially is the case when queens
are to be reared out of season.

The cost of rearing queens will decide their price, for of course
they will not be sold at prices which do not pay for rearing and a
reasonable profit besides. If buyers insist on having cheap queens,
they will get them, but their value will be found to correspond with
their price. The one-price rule, which is applied to queens throughout
the country, has the effect of causing many poor ones to be sold at
fair prices, which really should be killed. It has the tendency to
discourage the rearing of very superior ones, for as a rule, a thing is
no better than its price. When they are all sold at a uniform price it
is to be expected they will be nearly alike in merit, as there is no
special inducement for the breeder to improve his stock. The uniformity
of price probably originated in the supposition that all queens are
equally good, whereas experience proves the opposite to be true. A
queen that lays even a few more eggs daily than another is much more
valuable, for the extra number of eggs will be multiplied by the number
of days that she is kept. This difference alone, so often repeated,
will in time amount to more than the price of the queen. A poor queen
is kept at a corresponding loss, although both may have sold at the
same price. There are such things as plus and minus outside of algebra.
The buying of queens at present has some resemblance to a lottery.
They should be graded—at least so far as this is possible—and priced
accordingly.

Combinations for the maintenance of artificial prices are impracticable
and undesirable. I would only submit that prices be based upon cost of
production and a _reasonable_ profit.

Detroit, Mich.




  For the American Bee Journal.

Who is to Blame for the Losses?

C. H. DIBBERN.


Already the reports of fearful losses are coming in thick and fast.
Every severe winter the story is the same. Now the question arises,
are these losses of bees inevitable every cold winter? If so then our
business as bee-keepers is still a mere matter of luck.

During the last few years of mild winters the out-door wintering men
have had things about their own way in our bee-papers. Now, are these
papers not a little to blame for admitting articles to their columns
giving bad advice to the inexperienced? Many have advocated the
wintering on summer stands without protection or care, and persistently
claim to be masters in bee-keeping. I am perfectly willing to admit
that bees can be wintered very nicely on summer stands in a mild
winter, also that they are wintered successfully if well packed in
chaff in a cold winter; but I claim that the labor of preparing them is
more than double that of cellar wintering.

I contend that the only certain way is to prepare a suitable place
especially for the bees. If a cellar, have the floor cemented and see
that it is dry, dark, and well ventilated. In such a place they will
not consume more than half the amount of honey they would if left out
“packed” in the most approved style. This being a fact they have no
particular occasion for a flight. I know that the out-door men claim
that cellar-wintered bees do not breed early and are liable to “spring
dwindle.” I hardly know what spring dwindling is. By good spring
management I have never failed to have my hives crowded as soon as
there is anything for the bees to do. Then what is to be gained by
having the queen expend her energies and raising vast broods of bees
in February to be ready to die when the blossoms come? But sometimes
failure comes even in the best of cellars; but would they have fared
any better out of doors? Nine times in 10 the cause can be traced to
bees filling their hives from the refuse of cider mills. How to keep
them from storing such stuff is one of the great problems to be solved.

It is not to be supposed that any kind of a hole under a house will
do to winter bees. I have known bees to be packed away among onions,
cabbage, and sour kraut. In the spring they wonder what made their bees
die. Perhaps they were fastened by wire cloth so that the light could
be let in and the bees could not “get out you know.” That such must
fail is apparent.

I do not find fault with those who prefer to pack in chaff and winter
out of doors; I cannot see, however, that it is the best way.

It will be the “survival of the fittest” this winter, sure. The box
hive men and careless bee-keepers will go out of the business. It is
the golden opportunity for the bee-keeper of the future. Soon the
fields will be white with the harvest, but the laborers will be few.
The bees will have less competition in the fields and the honey in the
market.

Milan, Ill.

  [Are the papers reprehensible for giving place to candid and
  respectful arguments, whether based upon tenable or doubtful
  theories, intended to advance and simplify a science of
  such magnitude as the bee-keeping interest? Differences of
  opinion (and honest ones, too,) exist in almost all leading
  pursuits, and frequently, although seemingly contradicting
  each other, lead to successful results: again, as has been
  frequently demonstrated during the past winter, practices
  embracing all the most approved theories, have alike proved
  disastrous. There are so many favorable contingencies to be
  provided, that theories are powerless to insure success. It
  is interesting, as well as mystifying, to glance through our
  correspondence from week to week, and note the different
  methods of preparing bees for winter, and the disasters
  attending all the different styles. Nor are the cellars
  exempt from heavy losses, even where success has been
  proverbial heretofore: The truth is, the winter has been an
  exceptional one, and loss or success with a single or a few
  individuals, will neither establish nor disprove theoretical
  assertions; nor will it justify the “I told you so” class,
  because successful, in arrogating to themselves all of human
  wisdom.—ED.]

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ The North Western Wisconsin Bee-keepers Association will meet at
Germania Hall, LaCrosse, Wis., on Tuesday, May 10, at 10 a.m. All
interested in bee-keeping are requested to be present.

  L. H. PAMMEL, JR., _Sec._

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ The next meeting of the N. W. Illinois and S. W. Wisconsin
Bee-Keepers’ Association, will be held at H. W. Lee’s, 2 miles n.w. of
Pecatonica, Winnebago county, Ills., on the 17th of May, 1881.

  J. STEWART, _Sec._

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ On account of unfavorable weather the convention at Monroe Centre,
Ill., met on Feb. 8, and there being but few present, adjourned to the
same place on March 29, 1881.

  A. RICE, _Pres._




[Illustration:

  OLDEST BEE PAPER      ESTABLISHED
  in AMERICA            in 1861

  THE AMERICAN
  BEE JOURNAL
]

THOMAS G. NEWMAN.

EDITOR AND PROPRIETOR.

CHICAGO, ILL., MAR. 23, 1881.




Frank Benton in the Far East.


Mr. Jones sends us the annexed extract from a letter of Mr. Benton’s,
and the following appreciative compliment to the BEE JOURNAL, for which
he will accept our thanks:

  Herewith I send you extract from a private letter just
  received from Frank Benton, dated Pointe de Galle, Ceylon,
  Asia, Jan. 30, 1881. The AMERICAN BEE JOURNAL has a warm
  corner in my heart. Right glad am I that you have taken time
  by the forelock, and issued a weekly. I would not have you
  go back to a monthly for $25 a year, and you deserve the
  congratulations of every bee-keeper; that prosperity may
  crown your efforts is my wish.

  D. A. JONES.

       *       *       *       *       *

  FRIEND JONES:—* * * I shall start back with nothing but full
  colonies. I have seen two native races of bees here, and
  the comb of a third; one race is stingless, but worthless;
  the tiniest little fellows, three-sixteenths of an inch
  long. Another race is _Apis indica_. The third race I do not
  believe is valuable, since it is a very small bee—smaller
  than _Apis indica_. _Apis dorsata_ is a wonderful bee,
  whether it can be domesticated or not. It builds in the open
  air, on branches, often making combs 6 feet long; and I have
  good authority for saying that 30 natives have each taken
  a load of honey from one tree. It was not until I reached
  Colombo that I could find out anything about _Apis dorsata_.
  I call it _Apis dorsata_, but do not know positively as
  that is its name, for no one can tell here, and I have not
  yet seen the bee, as it was too late when I learned where
  to find it, to go to that part of the Island and reach this
  French steamer. Everybody says, though, a large bee, from
  which large quantities of honey are obtained, exists in
  the interior of the Island. The natives all know it by the
  name _Bombera_. I start for Singapore by the French steamer
  “Yangste,” on January 31st.

  FRANK BENTON.




=Circulars and Price Lists.=—We have received the following Circulars,
Price Lists and Catalogues for 1881:


  L. H. Pammel & Bros., LaCrosse, Wis.—Italian Queens and
  Bees—4 pages.

  Champion Bee Hive Co., Newcomerstown, O.—Apiarian
  Supplies—12 pages.

  Thomas J. Ward, St. Mary’s Ind.—Fruit Trees and Poultry—16
  pages.

  T. Greiner, Naples, N. Y.—Vegetable and Flower Seeds—24
  pages.

  D. D. Palmer, New Boston, Ill.—Sweet Home Raspberry—4 pages.

  Henry Alley, Wenham, Mass.—Queens and Apiarian Supplies—4
  pages.

  Wm. W. Cary & Son, Colerain, Mass.—Queens, Bees and Apiarian
  Supplies—8 pages.

  G. W. Thompson, Stelton, N. J.—Bees, Hives and Apiarian
  Supplies—4 pages.

  S. D. McLean & Son, Culleoka, Tenn.—Italian Bees and
  Queens—1 page.

  A. LaMontague, Montreal, Can.—Italian Queens, Hives and
  Bee-Keepers’ Supplies—3 pages.

  Jas. J. H. Gregory, Marblehead, Mass.—Vegetable, Flower and
  Grain Seeds—60 pages.

  T. M. Metcalf & Son, St. Paul, Minn.—Field, Garden and
  Flower Seeds—28 pages.

  Nanz & Neuner, Louisville, Ky.—Plants, Seeds. Bulbs,
  etc.—80 pages.

  Landreth’s Rural Register and Almanac for 1881, Philadelphia,
  Pa.—Garden Seeds—70 pages.

  Cole & Brother, Pella, Iowa.—Garden and Flower Seeds—44
  pages.

  J. T. Lovett, Little Silver, N. J.—Choice Small Fruit—40
  pages.

  Joseph Harris, Rochester. N. Y.—Field, Garden and Flower
  Seeds—14 pages.

  James M. Thornburn & Co., 15 John Street, N. Y.—Seeds for
  Garden and Farm—96 pages.

  L. B. Case’s Botanical Index, Richmond, Ind.—A Quarterly
  Botanical Magazine—40 pages.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ The Emperor of Russia, while returning from a review on Sunday, March
12, was killed by a bomb thrown by a Nihilist. He was taken to the
Palace and died in a few hours. The assassins have been arrested. His
son succeeds him as Alexander III.




An Excellent Suggestion.


  Prof. Cook has forwarded us for publication the annexed
  open letter, addressed to Dr. N. P. Allen, President of the
  North American Bee-Keepers’ Society. The reasons adduced in
  support of the suggestion are well founded, and must strike
  all minds favorably. September and October are usually among
  the busiest months of the year to bee-keepers and farmers,
  who have their later crops to garner, their honey to take off
  and prepare for market, their fruit to gather and assort,
  and their live stock to be made comfortable for winter;
  while the date proposed by the Professor occurs just at that
  period when everybody can spare the time best, when traveling
  is the most enjoyable, and is quite late enough to enable
  an approximate estimate of what the harvest will be. It is
  competent for the Executive Committee (of which President
  Allen is chairman) to fix upon such time as will best
  subserve the interests of the Society. We trust they will
  give the matter an early and careful consideration. Following
  is the letter:


  _To Dr. N. P. Allen:_

DEAR SIR: As the proposition which I am about to offer is of general
interest to the bee-keepers of our country, I beg leave to present it
through the AMERICAN BEE JOURNAL:

The American Association for the Advancement of Science convenes at
Cincinnati, Ohio, on Wednesday, Aug. 17, 1881. This Association had
at its last meeting, in Boston, August, 1880, more than 1,000 members
present. Owing to its influence, and the large annual attendance, the
local committee at the place where the meetings are to be held are able
to procure greatly reduced rates on railroads leading to the place.

Now, I would suggest that the North American Bee-Keepers’ Association,
which is to be held so near Cincinnati, convene at Lexington on
Wednesday and Thursday, August 24th and 25th.

1st. This would accommodate such persons as myself, who wish to attend
both meetings, and could not afford time or means were they widely
separated by time.

2d. A committee consisting of yourself, Mr. Muth, of Cincinnati, and
Mr. Wm. Williamson, of Lexington (I would do what I could to aid),
could act in conjunction with the local committee of the A. A. A. of
S., and I believe could get the commutation railroad rates to extend to
the National Bee-Keepers’ Association.

3d. August is a quiet time with bee-keepers, and so far as I can see,
nothing would be lost in making the date of our meeting earlier than
the usual time.

4th. The fact of accommodating such as wish to attend both meetings,
and the reduced railroad rates, could we secure them, would greatly
increase the attendance at the Bee-Keepers’ Association, and would
richly compensate for some loss, if such there would be.

I only make this suggestion, hoping that you and others interested will
give it such consideration as its merits deserve.

  A. J. COOK,

  Vice Pres’t of Nat. Association and
  President of Michigan Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ At the Utica Convention, last month, Mr. L. C. Root was appointed
a committee to endeavor to have the bill for the prevention of the
adulteration of sugar, syrups, etc., then before the Legislature of New
York, so amended as to include honey. We learn, with much pleasure,
that Mr. Root has succeeded in having it include honey, and Mr. R. is
quite sanguine that the bill so amended will become a law of the Empire
State. If passed, we hope that the bee-keepers of New York will see to
it that it will not be allowed to become a “dead letter” in the statute
books of that State.




[Illustration: _AMONG OUR EXCHANGES._]




GLEANINGS.


=Bees and Grapes.=—The Klassen and Krock difficulty about the bees
of the former committing depredations on the grapes of the latter, is
to be submitted to arbitration. It seems that the real trouble was a
“personal feud that does not concern bee-keepers at all”—the grape
matter was an outgrowth. This matter was referred to in Prof. Cook’s
article on page 74 of the BEE JOURNAL, and should now be entirely
divorced from the Bee and Grape controversy.


=Bees Dead in box hives.=—Mr. G. Castello, Saginaw, Mich., says that
on Feb. 22 he went to a neighbor’s, 5 miles distant, who had a box-hive
apiary consisting of 103 colonies of bees. After looking them over,
they found only 10 colonies alive; all the rest had died of dysentery.


=Honey for sore Eyes.=—Mr. S. C. Perry, Portland, Mich., says:

  “A neighbor of mine had inflammation in his eyes. He tried
  many things of many physicians; ‘was nothing better, but
  rather grew worse,’until he was almost entirely blind. His
  family was sick, and I presented him with a pail of honey.
  What they did not eat he put in his eyes, a drop or two in
  each eye, 2 or 3 times a day. In 3 months’ time he was able
  to read coarse print, and now, after 4 months’ use, his eyes
  are almost as good as ever. I have also found honey good for
  common cold-sore eyes.”




MISCELLANEOUS.


=Feeding in Winter.=—Mr. A. B. Weed, in the _Michigan Farmer_, says:

  “Many colonies which were put up for winter with but a small
  amount of provision, have consumed what was given them, and
  starved for want of more. Others have but a small amount of
  stores left, and must be fed soon if they are to be saved.
  The best way to feed such is to give them frames of well
  ripened honey, but this the weather will not always permit.
  The next best thing for them is candy; this can be given
  at any time, and can be laid on top of the frames. If the
  cluster is low down in the hive, it should be put down into
  it, where it can be reached.”


=Bees and Grapes.=—Mr. W. H. Stout, in the Lancaster, Pa., _Farmer_,
gives the following as his experience:

 By close investigation I have satisfied myself that bees do not destroy
sound grapes. I had, during the past season, 22 colonies of Italian
and common black bees; all the hives were in close proximity to the
grapes, while a number had the vines trained over them for shade during
the heat of summer. The grapes are of the Concord variety, of which I
had an abundance of fine fruit, some clusters of which grew within 18
inches of the entrance to the hives. Bunches of the grapes remained on
the vines until the frost had killed the foliage, which fell off and
left the grapes exposed, affording every temptation to the bees; and
this, too, through a season when the honey yield from natural sources
was so small that the bees consumed stores they had gathered earlier in
the season. But the bees do work on grapes, and also on other fruits
under certain conditions. If the skin of grapes, peaches, pears, etc.,
is ruptured from any cause, the bees, wasps, ants, etc., are very quick
in discovering it, and soon leave only the dried shells. During the
hot weather of August, especially when there are frequent showers, the
skin of ripening fruit cracks, for reasons which I will leave to some
philosophical friend to explain. My conclusions are not hasty; nor were
my observations superficial; but they were prolonged from the time
the first grapes ripened until the close of the season. I found some
clusters of grapes literally covered with bees scrambling and fighting
for the little sweets contained in the cracked grapes, which are the
only ones on which they work, as I found out by driving the bees away
and removing from the clusters all the bursted grapes, when the bees,
as soon as they found only sound fruit remained, went away and left the
grapes uninjured. We also laid some bunches of grapes on top of the
hives and others close to the entrances, also left clusters hanging on
the vines close to the hives, where they remained uninjured by the bees
as long as the fruit was sound. I know very well that bees can gnaw
through heavy muslin, or shave off wood and straw. To cover the bees we
have quilts made of heavy muslin, which they sometimes bite through,
and we have wood and straw hives on which they have enlarged the
entrances; but, nevertheless, I am fully satisfied they do no injury
whatever to sound fruit.


=Feeding Rye-Meal.=—In the _Indiana Farmer_ Mr. F. L. Dougherty says:

  “Bees will not raise brood without pollen in some shape.
  We frequently find colonies with but very little, and at
  times none at all. In crowding them on a few frames, quite
  frequently those left in the hive contain but little, if
  any. So it becomes necessary to furnish it to them, until
  they can gather it from natural sources. Unbolted rye-meal
  is probably the best substitute, although they will use
  wheat-flour, corn-meal, oat-meal, or in lieu of any of these,
  will even carry saw-dust. To get the bees started, place a
  piece of comb on the meal, and if the weather be pleasant and
  no pollen to be had they will soon appropriate it. They will
  leave the meal when natural pollen makes its appearance.”


☞ That excellent Monthly, published in Nyon, Switzerland, by Mons. E.
Bertrand,—the “_Bulletin D’Apiculteur pour la Suisse_”—gives the
Weekly BEE JOURNAL the following kind notice:

  “We have received the first 2 numbers of the AMERICAN BEE
  JOURNAL, which has been transferred from a Monthly to a
  Weekly, by its Editor, Mr. T. G. Newman. Only one apiarian
  publication is issued every 2 weeks, the _Bienen-Zeitung_ of
  Eickstadt. That of Mr. Newman’s is, therefore, ‘the only one
  in the entire world which is published weekly.’ It is also,
  without doubt, the most universal. Its principal contributors
  are among the most distinguished bee-keepers of America,
  together with scientists, entomologists, chemists and
  farmers; and the number of those who send it communications
  can be called legion. It is, with an understanding of the
  full extent of the services which it renders, through the
  abundance of the observations and of the information which it
  brings before its readers, that we offer to our colleague and
  friend our warmest felicitations on the occasion of the new
  development of his publication.”

This very kind notice is the more valuable as Mons. E. Bertrand is a
man of intelligence and wealth, whose sole interest is his love of the
pursuit of bee-keeping.


☞ _L’Apicoltore_, the organ of the Central Società d’Apicoltore
d’Italia, also gives the BEE JOURNAL the following very kind notice, in
its excellent number for February:

  “The bee-papers are every day augmenting to suit the
  increasing need of the readers, and the publisher of the
  AMERICAN BEE JOURNAL, Signor Newman, who came to Europe and
  to Milan last year, announces that at the beginning of 1881
  his Monthly JOURNAL will be issued every week.”

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ In Mr. A. Hoke’s letter, on page 77, he stated that the dead bees
covered the ground for several yards. That was bad enough, but our
compositor made it a hundred times worse by adding the word _hundred_.
The reader will please discount that expression accordingly.




[Illustration:

  _SELECTIONS FROM
  OUR LETTER BOX_
]


=But Few Bees Lost.=—We have had a pretty hard winter for bees,
although I have heard of but few losses in this section. My bees are
packed in chaff, and are all alive but 2 colonies, which were very weak
when packed. Success to the BEE JOURNAL.

  F. W. BURTNETTE.

  Morrice, Mich., March 12, 1881.


=An Old Queen.=—We have had a couple of warm, bright days at last,
and my bees are flying, what of them are alive. Out of 33 colonies, I
think I have 10 or 12 alive, some of them pretty strong, others weak. I
have 3 Italian colonies—they seem strongest. What hives I have looked
into, where the bees are dead, appear to have plenty of honey, and the
other bees appear to be taking the honey out, and I fear are taking
from the weak colonies also. Should I prevent them from appropriating
it? I noticed some drones with one of my Italian colonies; what does
that mean at this time of year? I have been a short distance south,
returning home 3 weeks ago. There has been great loss of bees in
Fayette and Wayne counties, as well as in Wabash. Please answer above
questions in the BEE JOURNAL.

  JOEL BREWER.

  Lincolnville, Ind., March 10, 1881.

  [It is not advisable to let bees have access to combs in
  other hives; if they need honey, put the combs in the hives
  where wanted, and not too many. If the strong are robbing the
  weaker colonies, exchange stands with them. The presence of
  drones thus early indicates an old or defective queen. Unless
  there is a large quantity of sealed worker brood (indicating
  the queen is perfect), we would supersede her as soon as
  possible, unless the bees save the trouble. —ED.]


=Gathering Pollen.=—My bees gathered pollen lively to-day, and are
strong for this time of year. My loss in wintering is 4 colonies,
leaving 8 to commence the season with. Nearly all the bees in this
county are dead.

  JOHN C. GILLILAND.

  Bloomfield, Ind., March 15, 1881.


=No Winter Flight Yet.=—I am trying to winter 163 colonies in Mitchell
hives. All are boxed and packed in chaff with 2 thicknesses of burlaps
over the bees; the ends of the hives to the division-boards are filled
with chaff; combs contracted to such numbers as bees would cover. They
were put into winter quarters Nov. 13, and have had no flight yet. I
find many colonies affected with dysentery, and 12 are dead. It is
snowing to-day with prospects of another blizzard. I cannot estimate
the loss at present; will report at a future time. With many others, I
am free to throw in my mite of joy for the weekly visitations of the
JOURNAL.

  D. VIDETO.

  North East, Pa., March 15, 1881.


=Bees Confined 4½ Months.=—This has been the severest winter that I
can remember. My 27 colonies of bees have not had a flight since Nov.
1. They are in a cellar; one of my neighbors had over 50 colonies,
but there are only 5 left. He tried to winter out of doors, but has
put what he had left in a cider mill. Another had over 20 colonies,
wintered out of doors and lost all. I have but little hopes of having
over 6 or 8 colonies; there is but little hopes of having weather that
bees can have a flight for 2 weeks yet. We are in a snow blockade yet.
We have had but one mail in over 2 weeks. I like the Weekly better each
number; it brings us nearer together and we can sympathize with our
bee-keeping friends. Let us hope for the best; there are better times
coming. Success to the Weekly.

  E. BUMP.

  Waterloo, Wis., March 14, 1881.


=Closed out by Fire.=—I had the misfortune to be “closed out” of the
bee-business by fire, on the night of March 4, losing all of my 36
colonies of Italians, one of which contained an imported queen. They
were all in the cellar; I also lost all the implements necessary to
carry on the business, my house and contents. This was “closing out”
rather unexpectedly, but I hope not to remain out very long.

  WM. H. TRAVIS.

  Brandon, Mich., March 10, 1881.


=Bees in Good Condition.=—Though there is a great loss of bees
hereabouts, mine are yet in good condition, and I hope they will come
out right in the spring. The Weekly BEE JOURNAL I value more and more
all the time.

  THOMAS LASHBROOK.

  Waverly, Iowa, March 11, 1881.


=Lost 8 out of 37 in Wintering.=—I put 37 colonies into winter
quarters, all in good condition except 4 or 5 small late swarms, and as
it was a poor season for honey, they did not fill up; 29 were packed
under a shed, open to the south and east. Before packing I removed the
outside frames and put in cushions made by covering empty frames with
sacking and filling with chaff; also 2 inches of the same on the top
of the racks. My loss to date is 3. I prepared 5 in the same manner,
but left them on the summer stands; lost 4. Two that I was sure would
starve if not fed, I removed to a room over another where a fire is
kept, placed them at a window and arranged a passage leading outside;
then, with wire cloth over the frames, I can feed and examine without
their flying out. They are all right. One I left on the summer stand
with a set of section boxes, unprotected, and it is very strong. On
March 9th my bees had their first good flight since Oct. 25. I had one
colony in a box-hive; of course they are dead. Total loss to date, 8
out of 37. Nearly all are strong now. I am with the majority when I say
that the Weekly BEE JOURNAL is a decided improvement. Success to it.

  WM. MORHOUS.

  Dearborn, Mich., March 14, 1881.


=Sweet Clover.=—Must the sweet clover be sowed over again, or does it
sow itself? Please answer in the Weekly BEE JOURNAL, which I could not
do without. It is the best bee paper that is published.

  LEWIS SIEGMAN.

  Newstadt, Ont., March 11, 1881.

  [A good “stand” of sweet clover will sow itself, as there are
  generally some seeds that do not catch the soil the first
  season, but germinate the second. It is more satisfactory,
  however, to plant the second season about half the complement
  put in the first, after which it will bloom annually, and sow
  itself.—ED.]


=Had a Flight in January.=—In the winter of 1879 I put 30 colonies
into my cellar; but it was so warm that they were uneasy and I put them
back on the summer stands. I lost 10 colonies; I now have 20 colonies,
facing the south, sheltered by a board fence on the north and covered
with about 18 inches of straw. About 10 days ago they had a nice
flight, and I covered them up again. I think of building a house for
them facing the south, and boarding up the other 3 sides; I will then
cover the hives with about 2 feet of straw, which I can remove on a
bright day and give them a flight. I intend to leave the straw on them
until warm weather, and thus aid them to keep warm for brood rearing,
&c. I wish the BEE JOURNAL success.

  T. RICE.

  Lenox, Ill., Feb. 4, 1881.


=Nearly All Dead.=—Bees are nearly all dead in this region. I had 33
colonies last fall and now have but 10; a neighbor had 40 and now has
none; another had 44 and now has 2; another had 75, and 3 weeks ago
they were reduced to 20. Several have lost all but 1 or 2, and some
have lost all.

  WM. S. BUCHANAN.

  Hartford, Ind., March 14, 1881.


=Bokhara Clover.=—Please answer the following questions in the JOURNAL:

1. When is the best time to sow Bokhara clover?

2. Should it be sown alone or with a grain crop, or with other kinds of
clover?

3. Should it be cut for hay, pastured, or kept for bees only?

4. Which is the best kind of hive for comb honey—a one-story with
racks to hold sections, or a two-story, with section boxes put in cases
in the upper story?

  JOHN H. HEARD.

  Flesherton, Ont.

  [1. Early in spring is as good a time as any for planting
  Bokhara, melilot or sweet clover—we fail to discover any
  difference in them.

  2. For bees alone, sow it alone.

  3. If desired for cattle or sheep, sow it with timothy,
  letting them graze it, as it blooms but little the first
  season; afterward keep them off.

  4. One-story with rack is more easily manipulated.—ED.]


=An Enthusiast.=—My apiary is located on a hill-side sloping to the
west, and hives fronting south. The Macoupin creek is ½ mile south
of it, and several sloughs within a mile, with plenty of soft and hard
maple, willows and cotton-wood. I packed rags around and on top of my
13 hives, on their summer stands, on the 25th of October. The bees
were in good condition. Only one colony gave any surplus; from that I
took 40 lbs., and left them 35. I examine my bees every week and clean
out the dead ones. They had a good flight on the 13th of December, and
again on Feb. 22d, when every colony had brood in all stages, and No.
2 was crowded full of young bees, and had a queen cell just ready to
put the egg in, which I took off. Feb. 26th was a warm day, and No. 2
sent out a swarm; it was queenless, however, so I sprinkled them with
peppermint water and united them with No. 12, which was weak. I do
not keep bees for profit in dollars and cents, but for pleasure, as I
do love them. I am a merchant, and own 275 acres of land, but being
an invalid, look to my bees for recreation. In a radius of 4 miles
from my apiary, on Nov. 1st, there were 13 bee-owners, with a total
of 73 colonies. On the 1st inst. there were 19 colonies left, and
they were in bad condition. I am the only one taking the BEE JOURNAL
here—success to it.

  R. M. OSBORN.

  Kane, Ill., March 4, 1881.


=Bees All Dead.=—I now send you my report for the winter of 1880–81,
which will long be remembered by the bee-keepers in this locality. I
commenced the winter with 9 colonies of bees, all carefully packed in
chaff on the summer stands with plenty of nice sealed honey. They were
packed on the 13th day of last Nov., and from that until the present
time (121 days) there has not been a single day that the bees could
safely fly, and the consequence is my bees are all dead, from the
effects of their long confinement. They left plenty of honey, but the
combs are badly soiled. I am not discouraged, however, and shall try
again. A gentleman living not far from here had only 8 colonies left
out of 39, 2 weeks ago, and when spring condescends to smile on us
again we think it will not need a returning board to count the bees
in this county. I am well pleased with the new Weekly; it is always a
welcome visitor.

  J. R. KILBURN.

  Fisher Station, Mich., March 14, 1881.


=Bees Robbing.=—Here in Texas we have had a severe winter, but not
much snow. The thermometer went down to 20° above zero. Last season
was a poor one for honey; we had a cold spell in Nov.; then had warm
weather for 2 weeks, and my hybrid bees began to rob. The pure Italians
behaved well, neither robbed nor let the others rob them. I used water
and kerosene oil, but it was of no use; at last I hit upon a remedy. My
hives have the bottom boards projecting in front. I ripped out one-inch
square pieces 5 inches long, cut coarse wire cloth 2x6, bent it
lengthwise in the middle, tacked on 2 sides of each block, leaving wire
about 5 inches to give them air; I drove a nail through each end and
nailed it in front of each hive. Every 10 or 15 days when the weather
was fine, an hour before night, I let them out to have a fly. We have
had fine weather for the last 2 weeks. I let the bees out on Jan 30;
they have been busy carrying in pollen from elm since Jan. 31, and have
forgotten their stealing propensities. I opened some hives this evening
and found plenty of sealed brood, and will have drones flying by Feb.
24.

  J. W. ECKMAN.

  Richmond, Texas, Feb. 10, 1881.


=Chloroform.=—About 10 years ago I used chloroform in handling bees,
after the following plan: I provided myself with a tin slide about 5
inches long and 2 wide; punched a few holes in it, and stitched on one
side of it a pad of 3 or 4 thicknesses of cotton cloth. Then after
closing all ventilators and entrances except the lower one, I turned
about one teaspoonful of chloroform on the pad and slipped it through
the entrance, and immediately closed the hive with a wad of cloth, I
then listened carefully until the bees had nearly ceased humming (or
about 1 or 2 minutes) and then opened the hive and withdrew the slide.
They were cross hybrid Italians.

  P. F. WHITCOMB.

  Lancaster. Wis., March 5, 1881.


=Test for Honey.=—Bee-keepers need a good honey test, to expose the
“rag syrup,” an admixture of honey and glucose, with which the New York
market is flooded. In every grocery, meat market and drug store there,
can be found cans of “Walker’s best honey,” labeled “Greenpoint, N.
Y.,” but there is not much honey in it. Last fall I went into a drug
store there with 4 samples of my best honey. They tested it, and what
they used turned it perfectly black. I saw one of Walker’s cans of
honey there, and asked them to test that; they did so, but the same
drugs had no effect whatever on that. They would not tell me what they
used to test it; but I would like to have a good and simple test given
in the BEE JOURNAL.

  H. RICHEY.

  Sing Sing, N. Y.

  [Pure green tea, well steeped, is used by many to detect the
  presence of glucose in honey. If the honey dissolves without
  changing the color of the tea, it is supposed to be pure.
  But in these days of “enterprise,” it is frequently a matter
  of doubt whether the tea is pure; again, if, as is claimed,
  glucose is sometimes manufactured without leaving sulphuric
  acid or other deleterious substances in it, then the tea
  would hardly expose it when mixed with honey. Alcohol is also
  used to detect the presence of glucose; but besides being
  frequently inconvenient to obtain, it requires considerable
  skill in its use.

  Thousands of bee-keepers will unite with us in thanking
  Prof. Kedzie, of the Michigan Agricultural College, for a
  simple test to detect adulterations in honey and syrups, and
  instructions for its application.—ED.]


=Three-Fourths of the Bees Dead.=—The present severe winter has killed
¾ of the bees in this section. Bees have not had a thorough cleansing
flight since Nov. 8. One apiary of 61 colonies, well packed in chaff
and plenty of good stores, will not go through with over 50 per cent.
Mine have been confined in the cellar for 118 days, have wintered well
so far, but are becoming uneasy.

  M. A. GILL.

  Viola, Wis., March 13, 1881.


=Mortality of Bees in House and Cellar.=—I put 60 colonies of bees in
a house and cellar last Nov.; 12 of them are dead and I have taken out
one-and-a-half bushels of dead bees. Nearly all have the dysentery. I
cannot do without the Weekly. I wish it much success.

  MILO MUNGER.

  Harvard, Ill., Mar. 14, 1881.


=Bees Doing Well.=—My bees had a nice flight on the 9th, 10th and 11th
of this month and are now doing well. It is cold again to-day.

  J. R. WAGGONER.

  Grantville, Kan., March 12, 1881.


=Dwindling in the Cellar.=—I put 53 colonies in the cellar, in good
condition, which are all alive but one; but there are a great many
dead bees on the bottom of the cellar—more than I ever knew before.
I gather them up and carry them away occasionally, to prevent their
tainting the air. Will the loss of so many weaken the colonies, and
what is the cause of it? My bees have not seen the light this winter,
yet they seem all right excepting the loss of so many on the cellar
bottom.

  WM. F. STANDISH.

  Evansville, Wis., March 9, 1881.

  [If the colonies were very strong, the loss may not be
  appreciable. The cause may be attributed to age of the bees
  when put away, and subsequent long confinement; or the
  cellar may have been too warm at times, and the bees become
  uneasy.—ED.]


=Contradictory Experience.=—The poor bees have suffered dreadfully in
this locality, and the circumstances and conditions under which some
have perished and others survived the past trying season, are so varied
that I am quite at a loss what to think about bee preservation during
the winter season. I had 12 colonies last fall; I packed 6 with chaff 6
inches thick around them, and have 1 colony left of the lot. There is
honey in the combs, but the bees are all dead. I put 3 colonies in the
cellar; 2 of them are alive, but in a bad condition, the combs being
dirty and moldy. I left 3 on the summer stands, and 1 is yet alive.
None died for want of honey; there was plenty of food for them in the
hives. The 6 were put into the chaff in the latter part of November,
and taken out on the 8th of March. The combs look clean and free from
mold. About a week before I took them out of the chaff I had taken off
the front boards, and finding the bees alive, shut them up again. Upon
taking them out this was the only colony that was alive. When I took
the chaff off, the bees were crowded around the entrance ready to fly,
which they did at once, and had a lively time until they were driven
inside by the approach of night. Do you think the other 5 colonies
were dead the first time I looked at them? They had a passage through
the chaff 1 inch high by 4 wide. A friend of mine here had 4 colonies
wintered outside, with an old piece of sail-cloth over them, and only
lost one, while old bee-keepers, with between 50 and 100 colonies, have
lost one half, and others have lost all.

  F. A. HUTT.

  South Bend, Ont., March 11, 1881.

  [Your question is a stunner; we have no data on which to base
  an intelligent opinion.—ED.]


=Wintered Without Loss.=—My 27 colonies came through the winter
without the loss of a single one, for which I can thank 4 or 5 colonies
of Italians, for without them I should not have had honey enough to
have kept them through, even a moderate winter, to say nothing of
such a stinger as we have had. I have withheld my opinion in regard
to the change in the JOURNAL from a monthly to a weekly till I had
tried it a couple of months, and will now say that it would be a great
disappointment if you were to go back to a monthly. I am glad that you
have so often devoted your first page in each number to the subject of
bee-pasturage, for that is, or should be, our leading study now, till
we are on surer ground. The best way to make bee-keeping popular is to
make it pay; and it will pay if we can get the pasturage every year.
I would rather have a tip-top honey plant than an Apis dorsata, if it
had a tongue long enough to lick the molasses out of the bottom of a 5
gallon keg. We shall have plenty of white clover this year.

  WM. CAMM.

  Murrayville, Ill., March 12, 1881.


=Bees Uneasy in the Cellar.=—This has been a very hard winter for bees
in this section of the country. Nearly all the bees are dead that were
left on the summer stands. I have 40 colonies in the cellar, all alive
but restless. They need a cleansing flight very much. The Weekly BEE
JOURNAL pleases me very much.

  CHAS. H. DOW.

  Freedom, N. Y., March 12, 1881.


=Bees Much Better Than Expected.=—My bees are much better than I had
any reason to expect. I left them on their summer stands, and did not
even take the tops off, but I have them all off now. I had about 80 and
now have 70 colonies in good shape. I find I must either attend to my
bees or quit the business, and have made arrangements with a friend who
has about the same quantity, who will take charge. We shall call it the
“Gipsy Apiary,” and our motto will be, “if the honey will not come to
us we will go to the honey.” Mr. Heddon thinks it won’t pay to move for
honey, and he is pretty good authority, but we will try. Keep us posted
through the JOURNAL where is the best place to sell honey. Keep the
ball rolling in the suppression of adulterated honey, as well as other
adulterations.

  I. H. SHIMER.

  Hillsboro, Ill., March 14, 1881.


=Have Young Bees and Brood.=—I put 15 colonies of bees into winter
quarters and now have 13 in fair condition; some had young bees 2 weeks
ago, and all of them have brood. The last 2 years have been very poor
for bees; the last the worst, being followed by such a cold and long
winter. About one half of the bees in this locality are dead.

  G. M. GIVAN.

  Moore’s Hill, Ind., March 14, 1881.


=Bees in the Cellar 135 Days.=—I carried 22 colonies of bees out for
a flight on March 8. This is the first suitable day for bees to fly
there has been here since they were put in the cellar on the last of
Oct. They came through the 4½ months’ confinement very well, except
2 or 3 third-rate colonies that had more hive room than they could well
keep warm through this cold winter, and now they seem to be somewhat
reduced in numbers. The day was rather cold, snow did not soften in
the shade but the sun shone brightly, “the winds were asleep,” and the
bees seemed to enjoy the fray, but left a good number of the slain on
untrodden snow. They were returned to the cellar at night and will be
supplied with water in their hives, hoping to secure the starting of a
good cluster of brood before they are placed on their summer stands,
about the 1st of May. I usually keep them in confinement without a
flight for 5 or 6 months, with good results, but in 1879 brood rearing
ceased about the 1st of Sept.; the hives were destitute of brood when
carried out, April 18, and although the hives filled rapidly with
brood, before it began to hatch nearly all the old bees were dead,
giving me the most disastrous case of spring dwindling that I have
known in an experience of 25 years. I hope to avoid such losses in the
future.

  A. WEBSTER.

  E. Roxbury, Vt., March 10, 1881.


=The Best Honey for Winter.=—By this time I presume all the readers of
the BEE JOURNAL know that the winter has been quite severe—about as
destructive to the older people as to bees. Bella Lincoln, the oldest
bee-keeper in this section of the country, died this winter; and since
then nearly all of his 100 colonies of bees have also died. My 60
colonies are in the cellar with chaff over the frames; some are dead,
and the entrances to others are soiled, indicating dysentery. Several
which had sealed honey stored in the summer are all right. Some worked
on a cider mill, but if they have good sealed honey I do not think it
makes so much difference about the kind of winter. I like the Weekly
BEE JOURNAL, because it “enthuses” me every time I read it. In any kind
of business one needs some enthusiasm, at least once a week.

  C. F. SMITH, JR.

  Vandalia, Mich., March 12, 1881.


=Carrying in Pollen.=—My 5 colonies of bees wintered well on summer
stands, in double-walled Langstroth hives. They are carrying in dark
pollen to-day; I think they get it from the maple.

  H. H. LITTELL.

  Louisville, Ky., March 5, 1881.


=Chaff-Packing of Bees Triumphant.=—The winter has been a severe one
everywhere. Since the 1st of Nov. until the first days of this month
my bees had not had a flight. I live in a very high altitude, about
the highest good land in the State. The winter begins early and lasts
long. We have an abundance of snow now and it is blustering wildly
to-day. I despaired of seeing my bees come out alive; they were covered
solidly with snow for 3 months, only the tops of the hives being
visible. At last the weather softened and I dug away the snow. The
next day or 2 the sun came out warmly and my bees began to fly, and
greatly to my happy disappointment they are all alive—all that I had
out on the summer stands. One only was dull, which I examined and found
enfeebled with dysentery, arising from the feed I gave them in the
fall. All others were strong. Just 122 days had intervened between the
flights. The sick colony has since died, but the others are in the best
condition. This success is a tribute to the chaff-packed hive. Is there
another record of 122 days’ confinement and yet come out strong?

  W. S. BLAISDELL.

  Randolph, Vt., March 11, 1881.


=Look out for the Robbers.=—We have had a very hard winter on bees in
this section of the country. Bees that were not properly packed for
winter are nearly all dead, while those that were properly packed are
nearly all in good condition. We are having good weather now and the
bees are flying nicely. Those having weak colonies and hives of combs
without bees will have to look out for robbers and keep their small
colonies crowded upon as few combs as they can, keeping the entrance
contracted, so that only 1 or 2 bees can enter at one time. Hives in
which the bees have died should be closed tightly. The Weekly BEE
JOURNAL is a welcome visitor. I could not think of doing without it.

  J. A. OSBORNE.

  Rantoul, Ill., March 17, 1881.


=Two-thirds of the Bees have Died.=—Over ⅔ of all the bees in this
part of the State are now dead. I have met with a heavy loss, on
account of a cider mill that was within 80 rods of my apiary last fall.

  HIRAM ROOP.

  Carson City, Mich., March 12, 1881.


=Bees in Good Condition.=—We put out on the summer stands on the 9th
and 10th of March, 150 of our 200 colonies that we had in the cellars
in good condition. These were the first days that bees could fly with
safety since the first of Nov. We have 50 colonies more in one cellar,
but as they seem to be doing well, we shall leave them in until it
becomes settled weather. We left 9 colonies on their summer stands but
the winter was so long and severe that we could not feed them and 3 of
them starved. Now we are busy transferring, that is shaking the bees
off the combs, cleaning them off and putting them into clean hives. If
we find any not strong enough we double them up. We consider ourselves
nearly masters of the wintering question, as our real losses for the
last 10 years, we think, would not exceed 6 per cent.; in fact we did
not lose a colony in winter or spring, until the number had reached
about 100. The BEE JOURNAL is a welcome Weekly visitor.

  T. S. BULL & SON.

  Valparaiso, Ind., March 15, 1881.


=Death Reigns among the Bees.=—Having made some inquiry concerning
the bees within a radius of about 2 miles, I find some bee-keepers,
some who keep bees, and those that let the bees keep themselves. Mr. H.
had 3 colonies, all are dead; Mr. L. had 7, one left; Mr. D. left his
11 colonies without protection and now has 11 empty hives for sale;
Mr. B. let the winters’ blast try his 20 colonies and now has 12 empty
hives; Mr. F. packed 37 in chaff and has 11 left; Mr. A. put up 57 in
complete order, but with all his precaution all are dead; Mr. B. put
into winter quarters 73 colonies of fine Italians, 58 of them are dead.
I packed in clover-chaff 101 colonies, and 23 have gone the way of all
the earth. My bees were confined in their hives from Oct. 20 until
March 6. I packed 24 in Langstroth hives with space the whole width of
hive left open, to give plenty of fresh air, yet at the same time warm,
with a due amount of packing, and in this lot have not lost one colony,
and very few bees; but the end is not yet. To-day I found young bees
with brood in all stages.

  G. W. NAFTZGER.

  South Haven, Mich., March 17, 1881.


=No Loss In Wintering.=—Nearly all the bees in this vicinity that
were left to care for themselves are extinct. I had 14 colonies packed
comfortably in chaff before the cold weather commenced, and have not
lost any yet. I am highly pleased with the Weekly BEE JOURNAL, and wish
it great success.

  J. P. MOORE.

  Morgan, Ky., March 14, 1881.


=Poor Season but Fair Profit.=—After selling my surplus colonies,
I commenced the season of 1880 with 37 colonies in fair condition;
increased by division and natural swarming to 63, and 12 nuclei.
I reared 30 Cyprian and Italian queens; had 100 Gallup frames of
foundation drawn out, and extracted 400 lbs. of honey. Estimating the
increase at $6 per colony, and deducting the expenses, my income for
care and labor is $250, or about $6.50 for each colony in the spring.
I put 75 colonies, in fair condition (including the 12 nuclei), into
winter quarters Dec. 8; some were short of stores, and all had poor
honey. On March 1st I found 8 colonies and 4 nuclei dead—4 starved and
8 died from the effect of poor honey and long confinement. More of them
are diseased and must have a flight soon or die. With the loss of stock
already mentioned, and allowing for more to follow, the credit will be
cut down to $3.50 per colony. The season has been the poorest I ever
knew, but even $3.50 is a fair profit on the investment. White clover
gave no honey; basswood lasted only 10 days, but yielded well; had it
lasted 2 weeks longer I should have had an average yield of honey for
the season. Without this flow of basswood honey, the bees must have
been fed, but now they have enough stores to carry them through till
spring. As the heavy snows have no doubt preserved the clover, the
outlook for honey this summer is good. I hardly need say that I am
pleased with the Weekly BEE JOURNAL.

  T. E. TURNER.

  Sussex, Wis., March 1, 1881.


=Planting Buckwheat for a Honey Yield.=—In answer to Mr. A. Hodges, on
page 78, I will say that buckwheat is a peculiar plant about yielding
honey. I have never known it to fail here in yielding enough honey
for the bees’ winter stores, and usually very much more; in other
localities in the same latitude, it cannot be relied on at all for a
honey crop. It seems, however, that it never yields through the entire
season in which it can be made to bloom. Quite a large amount of it is
cultivated every season in my vicinity, much of it generally coming
into full bloom as early as the middle of July, yet I have never known
it to yield any honey earlier than the 1st of August, and very rarely
before the 10th; but when it commences to yield honey, it does so
profusely until the plant itself is ripe, or killed by frost. I would
say to Mr. Hodges, or any one else intending the sowing of successive
crops of buckwheat, that it is useless to sow any early in the season,
to blossom before the 1st of August. I am intending to sow about 20
acres of it this season for my bees. I shall put the first crop of it
in the ground about June 25; the rest about July 10. That from the last
sowing will remain in bloom until frost comes, even if that is delayed
later than ordinary.

  O. O. POPPLETON.

  Williamstown, Iowa, March 9, 1881.




Local Convention Directory.

  1881.      _Time and Place of Meeting._

  April  2—S. W. Iowa, at Corning, Iowa.
         5—Central Kentucky, at Winchester, Ky.
                Wm. Williamson, Sec., Lexington, Ky.
         7—Union Association, at Eminence, Ky.
                E. Drane, Sec. pro tem., Eminence, Ky.
         7—N. W. Ohio, at Delta, Ohio.
        13—N. W. Missouri, at St. Joseph, Mo.
                D. G. Parker, Pres., St. Joseph. Mo.
    May  4—Tuscarawas and Muskingum Valley, at Cambridge,
              Guernsey Co., O.
                J. A. Bucklew, Sec., Clarks, O.
         5—Central Michigan, at Lansing. Mich.
        10—Cortland Union, at Cortland, N. Y.
                C. M. Bean, Sec., McGrawville, N. Y.
        11—S. W. Wisconsin, at Darlington, Wis.
                N. E. France, Sec., Platteville, Wis.
        12, 13—Texas Bee-Keepers’ Association, at McKinney,
                  Collin Co., Texas.
                    W. R. Howard, Sec., Kingston, Hunt Co., Tex.
  Sept. — —National, at Lexington, Ky.
        —Kentucky State, at Louisville, Ky.
   Oct. 18—Ky. State, in Exposition B’d’g, Louisville, Ky.
                W. Williamson, Sec., Lexington, Ky.

☞ In order to have this Table complete, Secretaries are requested to
forward full particulars of time and place of future meetings.—ED.




CLUBBING LIST.


We supply the Weekly =American Bee Journal= and any of the following
periodicals, for 1881, at the prices quoted in the last column of
figures. The first column gives the regular price of both:

                                  _Publishers’ Price._  _Club._

  The Weekly Bee Journal (T. G. Newman)               $2 00
  and Gleanings in Bee-Culture (A. I. Root)     3 00   2 75
          Bee-Keepers’ Magazine (A. J. King)    3 00   2 60
          Bee-Keepers’ Exchange (J. H. Nellis)  2 75   2 50
            The 4 above-named papers            4 75   3 75
          Bee-Keepers’ Instructor (W. Thomas)   2 50   2 35
          Bee-Keepers’ Guide (A. G. Hill)       2 50   2 35
            The 6 above-named papers            5 75   5 00
          Prof. Cook’s Manual (bound in cloth)  3 25   3 00
          Bee-Culture (T. G. Newman)            2 40   2 25

  For Semi-monthly Bee Journal, $1.00 less.
  For Monthly Bee Journal, $1.50 less.




Honey and Beeswax Market.

BUYERS’ QUOTATIONS.


CHICAGO.

HONEY.—The market is plentifully supplied with honey, and sales are
slow at weak, easy prices. Quotable at 18@20c. for strictly choice
white comb in 1 and 2 lb. boxes; at 14@16c. for fair to good in large
packages, and at 10@12c. for common dark-colored and broken lots.
Extracted, 8@10c.

BEESWAX.—Choice yellow, 20@23c.; dark, 15@17.


NEW YORK.

HONEY.—Best white comb honey, small neat packages, 14@16c.; fair do.,
14@16c.; dark do., 11@12; large boxes sell for about 2c. under above.
White extracted, 9@10c.; dark, 7@8c.; southern strained, 80@85c.

BEESWAX.—Prime quality, 20@23c.


CINCINNATI.

HONEY.—The market for extracted clover honey is good, at 8@10c. Comb
honey is of slow sale at 16c. for the best.

BEESWAX.—18@22c.

  C. F. MUTH.


SAN FRANCISCO.

HONEY.—The “Vigilant” takes 600 cases to Liverpool. There is a
slightly improved feeling consequent upon a little more inquiry,
but prices show no material appreciation. Discouraging reports are
received from the southern part of the State, as to the prospects of
the coming crop, but other sections give promise of an abundant yield.
With a good supply yet on the market, prices are not apt to be buoyant
until the anticipated failure is more fully settled. We quote white
comb, 12@13c.; dark to good, 9@11c. Extracted, choice to extra white,
5½@6½c.; dark and candied, 5@5½c.

BEESWAX.—22@22½c., as to color.

  STEARNS & SMITH, 423 Front Street.

  San Francisco, Cal., March 11, 1881.




SPECIAL NOTICES.


☞ Constitutions and By-Laws for local Associations $2 per 100. The name
of the Association printed in the blanks for 50 cents extra.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ “What is the meaning of ‘Dec. 81’ after my name on the
direction-label of my paper?” This question has been asked by several,
and to save answering each one, let us here say: It means that you have
paid for the full year, or until “Dec. 31, 1881.” “June 81” means that
the first half of the year is paid for, up to “July 1st.” Any other
month, the same.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ We will send sample copies to any who feel disposed to make up clubs
for 1881. There are persons keeping bees in every neighborhood who
would be benefited by reading the JOURNAL, and by using a little of the
personal influence possessed by almost every one, a club can be gotten
up in every neighborhood in America. Farmers have had large crops, high
prices, and a good demand for all the products of the farm, therefore
can well afford to add the BEE JOURNAL to their list of papers for 1881.

       *       *       *       *       *

HUNDREDS OF MEN, WOMEN AND CHILDREN rescued from beds of pain, sickness
and almost death and made strong and hearty by Parker’s Ginger Tonic
are the best evidences in the world of its sterling worth. You can find
these in every community.—POST. See advertisement. 9w4t

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ When changing a post-office address, mention the _old_ address as well
as the new one.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ We have prepared Ribbon Badges for bee-keepers, on which are printed
a large bee in gold. Price 10 cents each, or $8.00 per hundred.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ The Volume of the BEE JOURNAL for 1880, bound in stiff paper covers,
will be sent by mail, for $1.50.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ Notices and advertisements intended for the Weekly BEE JOURNAL must
reach this office by Friday of the week previous.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ Instead of sending silver money in letters, procure 1, 2 or 3 cent
stamps. We can use them, and it is safer to send such than silver.

       *       *       *       *       *

LADIES WHO APPRECIATE ELEGANCE and purity are using Parker’s Hair
Balsam. It is the best article sold for restoring gray hair to its
original color and beauty.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ The date following the name on the wrapper label of this paper
indicates the time to which you have paid. In making remittances,
_always_ send by postal order, registered letter, or by draft on
Chicago or New York. Drafts on other cities, and local checks, are not
taken by the banks in this city except at a discount of 25c., to pay
expense of collecting them.

       *       *       *       *       *

PREMIUMS.—For a club of 2, _weekly_ we will give a copy of
“Bee-Culture;” for a club of 5, _weekly_, we will give a copy of
“Cook’s Manual,” bound in cloth; for a club of 6, we give a copy of the
JOURNAL for a year _free_. Do not forget that it will pay to devote a
few hours to the BEE JOURNAL.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ Sample copies of the Weekly BEE JOURNAL will be sent _free_ to any
names that may be sent in. Any one intending to get up a club can have
sample copies sent to the persons they desire to interview, by sending
the names to this office.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ Any one desiring to get a copy of the Constitution and By-Laws of
the National Society, can do so by sending a stamp to this office to
pay postage. If they desire to become members, a fee of $1.00 should
accompany it, and the name will be duly recorded. This notice is given
at the request of the Executive Committee.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ It would save us much trouble, if all would be particular to give
their P.O. address and name, when writing to this office. We have
several letters (some inclosing money) that have no name. Many others
having no Post-office, County or State. Also, if you live near one
post-office and get your mail at another, be sure to give the address we
have on our list.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ At the Chicago meeting of the National Society we were requested to
get photographs of the leading apiarists, to sell to those who wanted
them. We can now supply the following at 25 cents each: Dzierzon, the
Baron of Berlepsch, and Langstroth. The likeness of Mr. Langstroth we
have copied, is one furnished by his daughter, who says, “it is the
only one ever taken when he was in good health and spirits.” We are
glad to be able to secure one of such a satisfactory nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ We have filled orders for quite a number of Binders for the Weekly
BEE JOURNAL. We put the price low, 30 per cent. less than any one else
could afford to sell them, for we get them by the quantity at wholesale
and sell them at just enough to cover the cost and postage, the latter
being 21 to 23 cents, on each. We do this to induce as many as possible
to get them, and preserve their Weekly numbers. They are exceedingly
convenient; the JOURNAL being always bound and handy for reference. The
directions for binding are sent with each one.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: GREGORY’S SEED CATALOGUE.]

=My Annual Catalogue of Vegetable and Flower Seed for 1881=, rich in
engravings from photographs of the originals, will be sent FREE to all
who apply. My old customers need not write for it. I offer one of the
largest collections of vegetable seed ever sent out by any Seed House
in America, a large portion of which were grown on my six seed farms.
_Full directions for cultivation on each package._ All seed _warranted
to be both fresh and true to name_, so far, that should it prove
otherwise, _I will refill the order gratis_. The original introducer of
the Hubbard Squash, Phinney’s Melon, Marblehead Cabbages, Mexican Corn,
and scores of other vegetables. I invite the patronage of _all who are
anxious to have their seed directly from the grower, fresh, true, and
of the very best strain_.

NEW VEGETABLES A SPECIALTY.

12m5  JAMES J. H. GREGORY, Marblehead, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

Valuable Book

Of Over a Thousand Pages.

_The Crowning Culmination!_ _A $5 Book for_ =$2.50=!!

=MOORE’S UNIVERSAL ASSISTANT=,

[Illustration]

_And Complete Mechanic,_

[Illustration]

Enlarged Edition, contains over =1,000,000= Industrial Facts,
Calculations, Processes, Trade Secrets, Legal Items, Business Forms,
etc., of vast utility to every Mechanic, Farmer, and Business Man.
Gives 200,000 items for Gas, Steam, Civil and Mining Engineers,
Machinists, Millers, Blacksmiths, Founders, Miners, Metallurgists,
Assayers, Plumbers, Gas and Steam Fitters, Bronzers, Gilders, Metal
and Wood Workers of every kind, Builders, Manuf’r’s and Mechanics.
500 ENGRAVINGS of Mill, Steam, and Mining Machinery, Tools, Sheet
Metal Work, Mechanical Movements, Plans of Mills, Roofs, Bridges, etc.
Arrangement and Speed of Wheels, Pulleys, Drums, Belts, Saws, Boring,
Turning, Planing, & Drilling Tools, Flour, Oatmeal, Saw, Shingle
Paper, Cotton, Woolen & Fulling Mill Machinery, Sugar, Oil, Marble,
Threshing & Rolling Mill, do., Cotton Gins, Presses, &c. Strength
of Teeth, Shafting, Belting Friction, Lathe Gearing, Screw Cutting,
Finishing Engine Building, Repairing and Operating, Setting of Valves,
Eccentrics, Link & Valve Motion, Steam Packing, Pipe & Boiler Covering,
Scale Preventives, Steam Heating, Ventilation, Gas & Water Works,
Hydraulics, Mill Dams, Horse Power of Streams, etc. On Blast Furnaces,
Iron & Steel Manufacture, Prospecting and Exploring for Minerals,
Quartz and Placer Mining, Assaying, Amalgamating, etc. 461 TABLES with
500,000 Calculations in all possible forms for Mechanics, Merchants
and Farmers, 800 items for Printers, Publishers and Writers for the
Press. 1,000 items for Grocers, Confectioners, Physicians, Druggists,
etc. 300 Health items. 500 do. for Painters, Varnishers, Gilders, etc.
500 do. for Watchmakers & Jewelers. 400 do. for Hunters, Trappers,
Tanners, Leather & Rubber Work. Navigation, Telegraphy, Photography,
Book-keeping, etc., in detail. Strength of Materials, Effects of Heat,
Fuel Values, Specific Gravities, Freights by rail and water—a Car
Load, Stowage in Ships, Power of Steam, Water, Wind, Shrinkage of
Castings, etc. 10,000 items for Housekeepers, Farmers, Gardeners, Stock
Owners, Bee-keepers, Lumbermen, etc. Fertilizers, full details, Rural
Economy, Food Values, Care of Stock. Remedies for do., to increase
Crops, Pest Poisons, Training Horses, Steam Power on Farms. LIGHTNING
CALCULATOR for Cubic Measures, Ready Reckoner, Produce, Rent, Board,
Wages, Interest, Coal & Tonnage Tables. Land, Grain, Hay, & Cattle
Measurement. Seed, Ploughing, Planting & Breeding Tables, Contents of
Granaries, Cribs. Tanks, Cisterns, Boilers, Logs, Boards, Scantling,
etc., _at sight_. Business Forms, all kinds, Special Laws of 49 States,
Territories and Provinces (in the U.S. and Canada), relating to the
Coll. of Debts, Exemptions from Forced Sale, Mechanics’ Lien, the
Jurisdiction of Courts, Sale of Real Estate, Rights of Married Women,
Interest and Usury Laws, Limitation of Actions, etc.

  “Forms complete treatises on the different subjects.”—_Sci.
  Am._

The work contains 1,016 pages, is a veritable Treasury of Useful
Knowledge, and worth its weight in gold to any Mechanic, Business Man,
or Farmer. Free by mail, in fine cloth, for $2.50; in leather, for
$3.50. Address:

For Sale by

  =THOMAS C. NEWMAN.=
  974 West Madison Street, CHICAGO, ILL.

       *       *       *       *       *

“American Apiary” for Sale.

About =150 Colonies of Bees=, in fair condition, in Langstroth hives;
honey and wax extractors, empty combs, and the usual implements of an
apiary.

Will sell for cash or trade for land.

  =PAUL DUNKEN=,
  Freeman, Cass Co., Mo.

0eow3t

       *       *       *       *       *

=Agents= Furnisht pleasant, profitable employment. Local Printing
House, Silver Creek, N. Y.

9y1

       *       *       *       *       *

=HONEY WANTED.=—I desire to purchase several barrels of dark extracted
honey, and a few of light; also Comb Honey. Those having any for sale
are invited to correspond, giving particulars.

  =ALFRED H. NEWMAN=
  972 West Madison street, CHICAGO ILL.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BRITISH BEE JOURNAL, AND BEE-KEEPER’S ADVISER.

The _British Bee Journal_ is published monthly at $1.75, and contains
the best practical information for the time being, showing what to do,
and when and how to do it. =C. N. ABBOTT=, Bee Master,

School of Apiculture, Fairlawn, Southall, London.

       *       *       *       *       *

SEEDS FOR HONEY PLANTS

A full variety of all kinds, including Melilot, Alsike and White
Clover, Mammoth Mignonette, &c. For prices and instructions for
planting, see my Illustrated Catalogue,—sent free upon application.

  =ALFRED H. NEWMAN=,
  972 West Madison St., Chicago, Ill.




Books for Bee-Keepers.


=Cook’s Manual of the Apiary.=—Entirely rewritten, greatly enlarged
and elegantly illustrated, and is fully up with the times on every
conceivable subject that interests the apiarist. It is not only
instructive, but intensely interesting and thoroughly practical. The
book is a masterly production, and one that no bee-keeper, however
limited his means, can afford to do without. Cloth, =$1.25=; paper
covers, =$1.00=, postpaid. Per dozen, by express, cloth, $12.; paper,
$9.50.

=Quinby’s New Bee-Keeping=, by L. C. Root.—The author has treated the
subject of bee-keeping in a manner that cannot fail to interest all.
Its style is plain and forcible, making all its readers sensible of
the fact that the author is really the master of the subject. Price,
=$1.50=.

=Novice’s A B C of Bee-Culture=, by A. I. Root. This embraces
“everything pertaining to the care of the honey bee,” and is valuable
to beginners and those more advanced. Cloth, =$1.25=; paper, =$1.00=.

=King’s Bee-Keepers’ Text-Book=, by A. J. King.—This edition is
revised and brought down to the present time. Cloth, =$1.00=; paper,
=75c.=

=Langstroth on the Hive and Honey Bee.= This is a standard scientific
work. Price, =$2.00=.

=Blessed Bees=, by John Allen.—A romance of bee-keeping, full of
practical information and contagious enthusiasm. Cloth, =$1.00=.

=Bee-Culture; or Successful Management of the Apiary=, by
Thomas G. Newman.—This pamphlet embraces the following
subjects: The Location of the Apiary—Honey Plants—Queen
Rearing—Feeding—Swarming—Dividing—Transferring—Italianizing
—Introducing Queens—Extracting—Quieting and Handling Bees—The Newest
Method of Preparing Honey for Market, etc. It is published in =English=
and =German=. Price for either edition, =40 cents=, postpaid, or $3.00
per dozen.

=Food Adulteration=; What we eat and should not eat. This book should
be in every family, where it ought to create a sentiment against the
adulteration of food products, and demand a law to protect consumers
against the many health-destroying adulterations offered as food. 200
pages. Paper, =50c.=

=The Dzierzon Theory=;—presents the fundamental principles of
bee-culture, and furnishes a condensed statement of the facts and
arguments by which they are demonstrated. Price, =15 cents=.

=Honey, as Food and Medicine=, by Thomas G. Newman.—This is a pamphlet
of 24 pages, discoursing upon the Ancient History of Bees and Honey;
the nature, quality, sources, and preparation of Honey for the Market;
Honey as an article of food, giving recipes for making Honey Cakes,
Cookies, Puddings, Foam, Wines, &c.; and Honey as Medicine, followed
by many useful Recipes. It is intended for consumers, and should
be scattered by thousands all over the country, and thus assist in
creating a demand for honey. Published in =English= and =German=. Price
for either edition, =6c.=; per dozen, =50c.=

=Wintering Bees.=—This pamphlet contains all the Prize Essays on this
important subject that were read before the Centennial Bee-Keepers’
Association. The Prize—$25 in gold—was awarded to Prof. Cook’s Essay,
which is given in full. Price, =10c.=

=The Hive I Use.=—Being a description of the hive used by G. M.
Doolittle. Price, =5c.=

=Extracted Honey; Harvesting, Handling and Marketing.=—A 24–page
pamphlet, by Ch. & C. P. Dadant, Hamilton, Ill. This gives in detail
the methods and management adopted in their apiary. It contains many
good and useful hints, and is well worth the price—=15c.=

=Practical Hints to Bee-Keepers=, by Chas. F. Muth, Cincinnati, Ohio;
32 pages. This pamphlet gives Mr. Muth’s views on the management of
bees, and embraces several of his essays given at Conventions, etc. It
will be read with interest by beginners as well as those more advanced
in the science of bee-culture. Price, =10c.=

=Kendall’s Horse Book.=—No book can be more useful to horse owners. It
has 35 engravings, illustrating positions of sick horses, and treats
all diseases in a plain and comprehensive manner. It has a large number
of good recipes, a table of doses, and much other valuable horse
information. Paper, =25c.=

=Chicken Cholera=, by A. J. Hill.—A treatise on its cause, symptoms
and cure. Price, =25c.=

=Moore’s Universal Assistant= contains information on every conceivable
subject, as well as receipts for almost everything that could be
desired. We doubt if any one could be induced to do without it, after
having spent a few hours in looking it through. It contains 480 pages,
and 500 engravings. Cloth, =$2.50=.

=Ropp’s Easy Calculator.=—These are handy tables for all kinds of
merchandise and interest. It is really a lightning calculator, nicely
bound, with slate and pocket for papers. In cloth, =$1.00=; Morocco,
=$1.50=. Cheap edition, without slate, =50c.=

☞ Sent by mail on receipt of price, by

  =THOMAS G. NEWMAN=,
  974 West Madison Street, Chicago. Ill.




Binders for the Bee Journal


[Illustration:

  EMERSON’S PAT. BINDER
  FOR MUSIC & PERIODICALS
]

☞ =Binders for the Weekly Bee Journal, of 1881=, cloth and paper,
=postpaid, 85 cents=.

We can furnish Emerson’s Binders, gilt lettered on the back, for
AMERICAN BEE JOURNAL for =1890=, at the following prices, postage paid:

  Cloth and paper, each      50c.
  Leather and cloth          75c.

☞ We can also furnish the Binder for any Paper or Magazine desired.

  =THOMAS G. NEWMAN=,
  974 West Madison Street, =Chicago, Ill.=




[Illustration:

  OLDEST BEE PAPER      ESTABLISHED
  IN AMERICA            IN 1861

  THE AMERICAN
  BEE JOURNAL
]


RATES FOR ADVERTISING.

A line will contain about =eight words=; fourteen lines will occupy one
inch of space.

  One to three weeks, each insertion, =20=cts. per line.
  Four        "  or more "     "      =18= "       "
  Eight       "     "    "     "      =15= "       "
  Thirteen    "     "    "     "      =12= "       "
  Twenty-six  "     "    "     "      =10= "       "
  Fifty-two   "     "    "     "       =8= "       "
          Special Notices, 50 cents per line.

Advertisements withdrawn before the expiration of the contract, will be
charged the full rate for the time the advertisement is inserted.

Transient Advertisements payable in advance.—Yearly Contracts payable
quarterly, in advance.

THE AMERICAN BEE JOURNAL is the oldest Bee Paper in America, and has
a large circulation in every State, Territory and Province, among
farmers, mechanics, professional and business men, and is, therefore
the best advertising medium for reliable dealers. Cases of _real_
imposition will be exposed.

  THOMAS G. NEWMAN,
  974 West Madison Street, =Chicago, Ill.=

Contents of this Number.


  Correspondence:

  What is the Royal Jelly?              89
  Putting Wires into Comb Foundation    90
  Importing Bees from Italy             90
  Bees and Grapes                       90
  The Use of Separators for Box Honey   90
  Texas for Bees and Honey              90
  Alsike Clover as a Honey Plant        91
  The Supply and Queen Trade            91
  Who is to Blame for the Losses?       91


  Editorial:

  Editorial Items                       92
  Frank Benton In the Far East          92
  Circulars and Price Lists             92
  An Excellent Suggestion               92


  Among our Exchanges:

  Bees and Grapes                       92
  Bees Dead in Box Hives                92
  Honey for Sore Eyes                   92
  Feeding In Winter                     92
  Bees and Grapes                       92
  Feeding Rye-Meal                      92
  The Weekly Bee Journal Abroad         92


  Selections from Our Letter Box:

  But few Bees Lost                     93
  An Old Queen                          93
  Gathering Pollen                      93
  No Winter Flight Yet                  93
  Bees Confined 4½ Months               93
  Closed Out by Fire                    93
  Bees In Good Condition                93
  Lost 8 out of 37 in Wintering         93
  Sweet Clover                          93
  Had a Flight in January               93
  Nearly all Dead                       93
  Bokhara Clover                        93
  An Enthusiast                         93
  Bees all Dead                         93
  Bees Robbing                          93
  Chloroform Used in Handling Bees      93
  Test for Honey                        93
  Three-fourths of the Bees Dead        93
  Mortality of Bees in House and Cellar 93
  Bees Doing Well                       94
  Dwindling in the Cellar               94
  Contradictory Experience              94
  Wintered Without Loss                 94
  Bees Uneasy in the Cellar             94
  Much Better than Expected             94
  Have Young Bees and Brood             94
  Bees In the Cellar 135 Days           94
  The Best Honey for Winter             94
  Carrying in Pollen                    94
  Chaff-Packing of Bees Triumphant      94
  Look Out for the Robbers              94
  Two-thirds of the Bees have Died      94
  Bees in Good Condition                94
  Death Reigns among the Bees           94
  No Loss in Wintering                  94
  Poor Season but Fair Profit           94
  Planting Buckwheat for a Honey Yield  94

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ We can supply but a few more of the back numbers to new subscribers.
If any want them, they must be sent for soon.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ The Texas Bee-Keepers’ Association will hold their third annual
Convention at Judge W. H. Andrews’ apiary, in McKinney, Collin Co.,
Texas, on the 12th and 13th days of May, 1881.

  WM. R. HOWARD, _Sec._,
  Kingston, Hunt Co., Texas.

       *       *       *       *       *

DON’T BUY SUPPLIES

Till you have read my new price list for the spring trade. Wax is
cheaper now, so I can sell you a fine article of Comb Foundation cheap,
and made on the best machine. Italian and Cyprian Queens, Bees, Hives,
Sections, etc. Price List free to all.

  J. V. CALDWELL,
  Cambridge, Henry Co., Ill.

  12w6m

       *       *       *       *       *

The Bee-Keepers Guide;

OR,

MANUAL OF THE APIARY,

By A. J. COOK,

_Professor of Entomology in the Michigan State Agricultural College._

286 Pages; 112 Fine Illustrations.

PRICE—Bound in cloth, =$1.25=; in paper cover, =$1.00=, by mail
prepaid. For sale by

  THOMAS G. NEWMAN,
  974 West Madison Street, Chicago, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOW READY,

Our =New Circular and Price List for 1881=. We have something new
for every bee-keeper. Remember, we are largely engaged in practical
bee-keeping, and know what supplies are of practical value in an
apiary. You should see a description of our feeder, you will want one.
Our new

Double-Draft Smoker is perfection. See what one of the most practical
and best informed bee-keepers in the country thinks of it: “Since
your great improvement in Smokers, as regards the double-blast, you
undoubtedly have the inside track of all the others in the market.
This, with the superior workmanship and materials used, should place
your Smoker at the head of the list, and secure for it a favorable
patronage for 1881.” Price of Smokers, by mail, $1.50 and $1.75. Our
book,

QUINBY’S NEW BEE-KEEPING is pronounced the most practical work
published. Price, by mail, $1.50.

We furnish everything used in advanced bee-culture. Send for
Illustrated Circular to

  L C. ROOT & BRO.,
  Mohawk, N. Y.

  12smtf

       *       *       *       *       *

Free to All.

I will send free to any address a sample of the =BEST FOUNDATION= made
for brood frames, also sample of =THIN FOUNDATION=, for sections, which
can be used the full size of the section, and yet will not leave any
“fishbone” in the comb honey. You can get nice straight combs without
tin separators. Circular, describing how foundation is made and giving
prices of apiarian supplies, free. Address, =J. A. OSBORNE=, Rantoul,
Ill.

  12w1tp

       *       *       *       *       *

BEES FOR SALE,

In Simplicity and Everett-Langstroth hives. My bees are perfectly
healthy in every respect—most of them good, strong colonies. Address,

  J. P. HOLLOWAY,
  Monclova, Lucas County, Ohio.

  12w1t

       *       *       *       *       *

=ITALIANS AND HYBRIDS=—30 or 40 Colonies for sale now. Queens and
Nuclei after May 15th. Address,

  R. M. ARGO,
  Lowell, Garrard County, Ky.

  12w3t

       *       *       *       *       *

=WANTED=—You to send for our Circular and Price list of
=American-Italians=. Address,

  JOS. M. BROOKS & BRO.,
  Columbus, Ind.

  12w6m

       *       *       *       *       *

FLAT-BOTTOM COMB FOUNDATION,

[Illustration]

high side-walls, 4 to 16 square feet to the pound. Circular and samples
free.

  J. VAN DEUSEN & SONS,
  Sole Manufacturers,
  Sprout Brook, Mont. Co., N. Y.

  11tf

       *       *       *       *       *

=BASSWOOD AND TULIP TREES=, from 1 to 8 feet in height, nursery grown.
The 2 best HONEY PRODUCING TREES KNOWN, at low prices.

  A. BATTLES, Girard, Pa.

  10w4t

       *       *       *       *       *

BARNES’ PATENT

Foot-Power Machinery

  CIRCULAR and
  SCROLL SAWS

[Illustration]

Hand, Circular Rip Saws for general heavy and light ripping. Lathes,
&c. These machines are especially adapted to =Hive Making=. It will pay
every bee-keeper to send for our 48 page Illustrated Catalogue.

  W. F. & JOHN BARNES
  Rockford, Winnebago Co., Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: WILBOR’S COMPOUND OF PURE COD-LIVER OIL AND LIME.]

=Wilbor’s Cod-Liver Oil and Lime.=—Persons who have been taking
Cod-Liver Oil will be pleased to learn that Dr. Wilbor has succeeded,
from directions of several Professional gentlemen, in combining the
pure Oil and Lime in such a manner that it is pleasant to the taste,
and its effects in Lung complaints are truly wonderful. Very many
persons whose cases were pronounced hopeless, and who had taken the
clear Oil torn long-time without marked effect, have been entirely
cured by using this preparation. Be sure and get the genuine.
Manufactured only by A. B. WILBOR, Chemist, Boston. Sold by all
druggists.

  11w4t

       *       *       *       *       *

  THE CANADIAN FARMER
  THE ONLY
  Agricultural Weekly
  PUBLISHED IN THE
  DOMINION OF CANADA.

This practical journal is now in its =Third Year=, and meeting with
immense success. The low price of its subscription ($1.00 per year) in
its new and improved form (16 pages 13½ x 10½, folded and pasted)
makes it very popular. Its editors are all practical men. It is the
=Best Advertising Medium= in Canada. Sample copies sent free to any
address.

  =N. B. COLCOCK=, Welland, Ont.

  11w26tx

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

I HAVE NOW OVER

300 COLONIES

of Pure Italian Bees, in good condition, in 10 frame Langstroth hives.
Orders for

ITALIAN QUEENS,

Nuclei and Full Colonies,

are now being booked and will be filled in rotation as received,
commencing about June 1st., at the following prices:

  Tested Queens, each                     $2 50
     "     "     per half-dozen           13 50
  1 frame Nucleus, with Tested Queen       5 00
  2   "      "      "     "      "         5 50
  3   "      "      "     "      "         6 00
  4   "      "      "     "      "         6 50
  Full Colonies, each                     12 00
   "       "     in lots of 5, each       10 00
   "       "         "     10, each        9 00

I will use all possible care in preparing the above for shipment, but
cannot guarantee safe arrival, except on queens any distance less than
1,000 miles.

  ALSO
  100 COLONIES
  OF
  BLACK AND HYBRID BEES,

In Langstroth hives, in quantities of not less than 5 colonies at
=$8.00= each, which I will ship direct from the South.

  ALFRED H. NEWMAN,

  972 West Madison St.,      CHICAGO, ILL.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ORIGINAL

Patented Jan. 9, 1878, and May, 1879; Re-issued July 9, 1878.

[Illustration]

If you buy a Bingham Smoker, or a Bingham & Hetherington Honey Knife
you are sure of the best and cheapest, and not liable to prosecution
for their use and sale. The largest bee-keepers use them exclusively.
Twenty thousand in use—not one ever returned, or letter of complaint
received. Our original patent Smokers and Honey Knives were the only
ones on exhibition at the last National Bee-Keepers’ Convention, 1880.
Time sifts the wheat from the chaff. Pretensions are short-lived.

The Large and Extra Standard have extra wide shields to prevent burning
the fingers and bellows. A real improvement.

Send postal card for testimonials.

  Bingham & Hetherington Honey Knife      2     in., $1 00
  Large Bingham Smoker                    2½     "    1 50
  Extra Standard Bingham Smoker           2      "    1 25
  Plain Standard Bingham Smoker           2      "    1 00
  Little Wonder Bingham Smoker            1¾     "      75

If to be sent by mail, or singly by express, add 25c. each, to prepay
postage or express charges.

To sell again, apply for dozen or half-dozen rates.

Address,

  BINGHAM & HETHERINGTON,
  OTSEGO, MICH.

  9wtf

       *       *       *       *       *

FREE!

We wish to obtain 25,000 New Subscribers to

THE FLORAL MONTHLY

during the next few months, and we propose to give to every reader of
this paper

50c. worth of Choice Flower Seed.

Our offer is to send Free of Cost, 50 cents’ worth of Choice Flower
Seeds to each and every one who will send us 25 two cent postage stamps
for the =FLORAL MONTHLY= one year. Seeds sent free by return mail.
Specimen copies free. Address,

  W. E. MORTON & CO., FLORISTS,
  615 Congress Street, Portland, Me.

☞ Natural Flowers preserved to last for years.

  9w4t

       *       *       *       *       *

It will Pay you

To read our forty page Catalogue of Apiarian Supplies. It gives the
latest information about the best appliances and methods pertaining to

Profitable Bee Culture

Sent free to all who send us their names and addresses, _plainly
written_, upon a postal card. Address

  H. A. BURCH & CO.,
  South Haven, Mich.

  9wtf.

       *       *       *       *       *

R. A. BURNETT.

  Successor to Conner, Burnett & Co.,
  165 South Water Street, Chicago, Ill.,

GENERAL PRODUCE COMMISSION,

HONEY A SPECIALTY.

We ask you to correspond with us before disposing of your HONEY CROP,
as we can be of much service, having constant intelligence from all
parts of the country. We would refer to JAMES HEDDON, Dowagiac, Mich.,
and J. OATMAN & SONS, Dundee, Ill.

  1w1y

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

  GOOD WORK
  AT FAIR PRICES.

  HALLOCK & CHANDLER
  WOOD ENGRAVERS
  & Electrotypers

  167 DEARBORN ST.
  CHICAGO
]

  1w1y

       *       *       *       *       *

  REV. A. SALISBURY.      =1881.=      J. V. CALDWELL.

  SALISBURY & CALDWELL,
  Camargo, Douglas County. Ill.

[Illustration]

Warranted Italian Queens, $1.00; Tested Italian Queens, $2.00; Cyprian
Queens, $2.00; Tested Cyprian Queens, $4.00; 1 frame Nucleus, Italians,
$4.00; 1 frame Nucleus, Cyprians, $5.00; Colony of Italians, 8 frames,
$5.00; Colony of Cyprians, 8 frames, $10.00. Wax worked 10c. per lb.
Pure Comb Foundation, on Dunham Machine, 25 lbs. or over, 35c. per lb.
☞ Send for Circular.

  1w1y

       *       *       *       *       *

Florida Land—640 Acres.

☞ CHEAP FOR CASH. ☜

DESCRIPTION.—Sec. 4, township 7, south range 7 west, Franklin county,
Florida, situated about 50 miles south of the Georgia line, 25 miles
west of the city of Tallahasse, the capital of the State, and about 25
miles northeast of the city of Apalachicola, a seaport on the Gulf of
Mexico, and within 2 sections (5 and 6) of the Apalachicola river; the
soil is a rich, sandy loam, covered with timber.

It was conveyed on Dec. 31st. 1875, by Col. Alexander McDonald, who
owned 6 sections, including the above, to J. M. Murphy, for $3,200, and
on Sept. 5th. 1877, by him conveyed to the undersigned for $3,000. The
title is perfect, and it is unincumbered, as shown by an abstract from
the Records of the county, duly attested by the County Clerk; the taxes
are all paid and the receipts are in my possession.

I will sell the above at a bargain for cash, or trade for a small farm,
or other desirable property. An offer for it is respectfully solicited.
Address,

  THOMAS G. NEWMAN,
  974 West Madison Street, CHICAGO, ILL.

       *       *       *       *       *

Given’s Foundation Press.

The latest improvement in Foundation. Our thin and common Foundation
is not surpassed. The only invention to make Foundation in the wired
frame. All Presses warranted to give satisfaction. Send for Catalogue
and Samples.

  =D. S. GIVEN=, Hoopeston, Ill.

  1w1y

       *       *       *       *       *

PARKER’S GINGER TONIC

=Ginger=, =Buchu=, =Mandrake=, =Stillingia= and many other of the best
medicines known are combined so skillfully in PARKER’S GINGER TONIC
as to make it the =greatest Blood Purifier= and the =Best Health and
Strength Restorer ever used=.

It cures =Dyspepsia=, =Rheumatism=, =Neuralgia=, =Sleeplessness=, and
all diseases of the =Stomach=, =Bowels=, =Lungs=, =Liver=, =Kidneys=,
=Urinary Organs= and all =Female Complaints=.

If you are wasting away with Consumption or any disease, use the TONIC
to-day. No matter what your symptoms may be, it will surely help you.

Remember! This TONIC cures drunkenness, is the =Best Family Medicine=
ever made, entirely different from Bitters, Ginger Preparations and
other Tonics, and combines the best curative properties of all. Buy a
50c. bottle of your druggist. None genuine without our signature on
outside wrapper.

  HISCOX & CO., Chemists, New York.

=PARKER’S HAIR BALSAM= The best and most economical Hair Dressing

       *       *       *       *       *

=65= _ENGRAVINGS_.

The Horse

BY B. J. KENDALL, M. D.

=A TREATISE= giving an index of diseases, and the symptoms; cause and
treatment of each, a table giving all the principal drugs used for the
horse, with the ordinary dose, effects and antidote when a poison;
a table with an engraving of the horse’s teeth at different ages,
with rules for telling the age of the horse; a valuable collection of
recipes, and much valuable information.

=Price 25 cents.=—Sent on receipt of price, by

  THOMAS G. NEWMAN,
  974 West Madison Street, CHICAGO, ILL.

       *       *       *       *       *

=ITALIAN QUEENS=, Full Colonies, Nuclei and Bee Hives specialties. Our
=new= Illustrated Catalogue of Bees, Supplies, Fine Poultry, Small
Fruits, &c., =Free=. ☞ Send for it and save money. J. T. SCOTT & BRO.,
Crawfish Springs, Ga.

  2w32tx


[Illustration:

  THE AMERICAN
  POULTRY JOURNAL.
]

Is a 32–page beautifully Illustrated Monthly Magazine devoted to

POULTRY, PIGEONS AND PET STOCK.

It has the largest corps of practical breeders as editors of any
journal of its class in America, and is

THE FINEST POULTRY JOURNAL IN THE WORLD.

Volume 12 begins January 1881. SUBSCRIPTION:— $1.00 per year. Specimen
Copy, 10 cents.

  C. J. WARD, Editor and Proprietor.
  182 CLARK ST.,      CHICAGO.

       *       *       *       *       *

TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES.

1. Italic text is denoted by _underscores_ and bold text
   by =equal signs=.

2. =ITALIANS AND HYBRIDS= “—30 or 40 Colonies for sale low.”
   “low” changed to “now”.

3. Simple spelling, grammar, and typographical errors have been
   silently corrected.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN BEE JOURNAL. VOL. XVII, NO. 12, MAR. 23, 1881 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.