133·Quicker ways to homemade ... with BISQUICK


                                                                    FROM
                                                         _Betty Crocker_
                                                        OF GENERAL MILLS

    [Illustration: Betty Crocker]

This little cook book is dedicated to you who would like to give your
families more of your homemade good things, if you only had the time.

Bisquick makes that possible ... good homemade food, quickly prepared.
You can cook with love and enjoy the cooking more, when you use this
cook book and your Bisquick. Once you start, I know you’ll want to try
every idea in the book.

                                                         {Betty Crocker}




                                CONTENTS


  BISCUITS                                                        page 3
  MAIN DISHES                                                     page 5
  MUFFINS, COFFEE CAKE                                            page 8
  DUMPLINGS                                                      page 10
  NUT BREADS                                                     page 12
  PANCAKES, WAFFLES                                              page 14
  SHORTCAKE                                                      page 18
  VELVET-CRUMB CAKE                                              page 20
  YEAST BAKING                                                   page 23
  ALL-TIME FAVORITES                                             page 26
  INDEX                                                       back cover

                                                    © 1959 General Mills
                                                         Litho in U.S.A.

    [Illustration: Biscuits]




                  Biscuits: _How to make them perfect_


    [Illustration: Heat oven to 450° (hot). Add ⅔ cup milk all at once
    to 2 cups Bisquick. Stir with fork into a soft dough. Beat dough
    vigorously 20 strokes, until stiff and slightly sticky.]

    [Illustration: Roll dough around on cloth-covered board lightly
    dusted with Bisquick to prevent sticking.]

    [Illustration: Knead gently 8 to 10 times to smooth up dough.]

    [Illustration: Roll ½″ thick. Biscuits double in size in baking. Dip
    cutter in Bisquick. Cut close together to save rerolling.

    Bake on ungreased shiny baking sheet _10 to 15 min._; close together
    for soft sides, 1″ apart for crusty sides. _Makes 12 2″ biscuits._]

_For Drop Biscuits_ ... drop dough with spoon on greased baking sheet.
      Bake as above.

_For Richer Biscuits_ ... follow directions above—except mix ¼ cup soft
      butter or shortening, or 3 tbsp. cooking (salad) oil into Bisquick
      before mixing in milk.

_For Buttermilk Biscuits_ ... use ¾ cup buttermilk for liquid. It may be
      necessary to use a few additional tablespoons of buttermilk to
      make a dough of soft consistency.

 Dress up your biscuits 10 ways
      Kind              Add to recipe                  Serve with

 Bacon           ⅓ cup crisply cooked diced   grapefruit, scrambled eggs
                 bacon
 Cheese          ½ cup grated sharp cheese    veal steak and vegetables
 Chives          ¼ cup finely chopped chives  wieners and baked beans
 Curry           ¼ tsp. curry powder          chicken casserole
                                              fruit salad
 Ham             ½ cup chopped boiled or      cheese soufflé, green salad
                 baked ham
 Herb            ¼ tsp. nutmeg, ½ tsp.        beef or veal stew
                 crumbled dry sage, and 1¼
                 tsp. caraway seeds
 Lemon           1 tsp. grated lemon rind.    crispy fried fish
                 Add 2 tbsp. lemon juice to
                 ½ cup milk and use for milk
                 in directions.
 Olive           ¼ cup chopped stuffed olives sea food or meat casserole
 Peanut          ⅓ cup chopped peanuts        pot roast and vegetables
 Salami          ½ cup chopped salami sausage mixed vegetables and cheese
                                              salad


                              Pecan Rolls

Mix ½ cup _each_ melted butter, brown sugar. Spoon into 12 large muffin
cups with three pecan halves in each. Cover with Biscuit dough; bake 15
minutes. Quick and delicious for Sunday brunch.


                             Butter Sticks

Heat oven to 450° (hot). Make Rolled Biscuit dough (recipe page 3
)—except add 2 tbsp. dry onion soup mix. Roll dough into a rectangle,
10×6″. Cut in half lengthwise. Cut each half into 12 strips (about
3×½″). Melt ⅓ cup butter and add 2 tbsp. dry onion soup mix; pour half
of it into oblong pan, 13×9½×2″. Place strips in pan. Pour remaining
butter over tops. _Bake 10 to 15 min._


                           Quantity Biscuits

                       For 60 Medium. Serves 30.

                            10 cups Bisquick
                    (40-oz. pkg. or two 20-oz. pkg.)
                              3⅓ cups milk

                       For 100 Medium. Serves 50.

                     15 cups Bisquick (60-oz. pkg.)
                              5 cups milk

                   Follow Biscuit directions (page 3).




                   Main dishes _with biscuit topping_


    [Illustration: Meat and Vegetable Pie]


                         Meat and Vegetable Pie

  1 lb. stewing beef (cubed)
  ½ cup Bisquick
  ½ tsp. salt
  ⅛ tsp. pepper
  ⅛ tsp. paprika, if desired
  1 medium tomato, chopped; or ½ cup canned tomatoes
  1 to 2 small onions, chopped
  2 large carrots, sliced
  1 small clove garlic, cut up
  ¼ tsp. Worcestershire sauce
  salt and pepper

Roll meat in mixture of Bisquick, salt, pepper, and paprika. Brown meat
thoroughly on all sides in a little hot fat. Add tomatoes, onions,
carrots, and garlic; sauté until onions are transparent. Add enough
water to cover meat and vegetables. Cover tightly and cook over low heat
until meat is tender, 1½ to 2 hr. Add Worcestershire sauce, salt, and
pepper. _Heat oven to 425°_ (hot). Pour stew in 1½-qt. baking dish and
cover with ½ recipe for Biscuits (recipe page 3). Bake _about 12 min._
until biscuits are a golden brown. _2 to 3 servings._


                            Chicken Pot Pie

  ¼ cup chicken fat or butter
  ¼ cup Bisquick
  1½ tsp. salt
  ¼ tsp. pepper
  2 cups chicken stock (saved from stewing chicken)
  ⅔ cup cream
  3 to 4 cups chicken (cut in large pieces)

Heat oven to 450° (hot). Heat chicken fat. Blend in Bisquick, salt,
pepper. Remove from heat. Stir in chicken stock, cream, chicken. Cook
over low heat until thickened (about 5 min.). Pour _hot_ filling into
baking dish, 11½×7½×1½″. Cover with Richer Biscuit dough (recipe page 3)
rolled out to fit top of baking dish. Cut 2 or 3 slits in center. Bake
_about 15 min. 4 to 6 servings._

_Note_: If desired, use chicken fat for shortening in Biscuit recipe.


                      Deep-Dish Salmon-Cheese Pie

  1 tbsp. chopped onion
  2 tbsp. butter or other fat
  ¼ cup Bisquick
  1½ cups milk
  1 cup grated sharp Cheddar cheese
  1 lb. can salmon, drained and broken into large pieces
  1 tsp. salt
  few grains pepper

Heat oven to 450° (hot). Sauté onion in butter. Remove from heat. Blend
in Bisquick. Slowly stir in milk. Bring to boil over low heat, stirring
constantly. Boil 1 min. Stir in rest of ingredients. Turn hot mixture
into greased 1½-qt. baking dish and heat in oven until mixture bubbles.
Make ½ Biscuit dough (recipe page 3). Pat or roll out to fit top of
baking dish. Place on hot mixture. Cut 2 or 3 slits in center. Bake
_about 15 min._ or until topping is brown. _4 to 6 servings._


                           Tuna Pinwheel Roll

  two 7-oz. cans tuna, with 2 tbsp. oil
  ½ cup chopped onion
  ½ cup grated sharp cheese
  ¼ cup chopped parsley
  1 tsp. celery salt
  ½ tsp. salt
  ¼ tsp. pepper
  1 egg, slightly beaten

Heat oven to 375° (quick mod.). Mix all ingredients except set aside 2
tbsp. of egg. Make Biscuit dough (recipe page 3). Roll into a rectangle,
15×10″. Spread with tuna filling. Roll like jelly roll, starting with
wide side. Place on well greased baking sheet in ring shape, with seam
side down. Pinch ends together. Slice 12 even slices almost to the
center edge, leaving about 1″. Turn each piece on its side to show
filling. Brush all over with remaining egg. Bake _25 to 30 min._ Serve
with Bleu Cheese Sauce: ½ cup Bleu cheese, crumbled, in 2 cups medium
white sauce. _4 to 6 servings._


                             Meat Turnovers

    [Illustration: Turnovers]

Heat oven to 450° (hot). Make Richer Biscuit dough (recipe page 3). Roll
into rectangle, 18×10″. Cut in 8 pieces, 5×4½″. Place slice of cooked or
canned meat on half of square. Spread with 1 tbsp. chili sauce or pickle
relish. Fold dough over meat and seal edges with fork. Slit top. Bake
about _15 min._ on greased baking sheet. _4 to 8 servings._


                          Baked Meat Sandwich

    [Illustration: Baked meat sandwich]

  1 lb. ground lean pork
  ½ cup chopped onion
  ¼ cup grated Parmesan cheese
  ½ cup grated Swiss cheese
  1 large egg, beaten
  ¼ tsp. Tabasco sauce
  1½ tsp. salt
  2 tbsp. minced parsley

Heat oven to 400° (mod. hot). Cook pork and onion over low heat until no
longer pink. (Do not brown. Stir with fork to break up as it cooks.)
Cool. Mix in rest of ingredients. Add ¼ cup mayonnaise to Biscuit dough
(recipe page 3). Mix well with fork. Spread half of dough in well
greased square pan, 8×8×2″. Spread meat mixture over dough. Spread rest
of dough over mixture. (The top will even out during baking.) Brush with
beaten egg yolk to give crusty glaze. Bake _25 to 30 min._ Cut in slices
about ½″ thick and serve hot or cold.


                         Saucy Pigs in Blankets

Heat oven to 450° (hot). Make Rolled Biscuit dough (recipe page 3). Roll
into circle ⅛″ thick. Cut circle into 8 equal wedges. Spread each wedge
with 1 tbsp. well drained sauerkraut. Roll a frankfurter in each wedge,
starting at wide end and seal well by pinching tip into roll. Sprinkle
rolls with poppy seeds. Place on baking sheet. Bake _about 15 min._
Serve immediately with hot tomato sauce and additional sauerkraut on the
side. _Makes 8._


                          Main Dish Shortcakes

                    (Use Richer Biscuit dough—page 3)

• _Plain Individual Shortcakes_

Roll dough about ¾″ thick, and cut with 3″ round cutter. Bake. Split and
serve with desired filling.

• _Plain Large Shortcake_

Pat out ½ of dough in round or square 8″ pan, dot with butter. Pat out
rest of dough and place on top. Bake. Split and serve with desired
filling.

• _Large Shortcake in Ring_

Spread dough in well greased 8 or 9″ ring mold. Bake. Turn out on large
platter. Fill center with desired filling.

• _Creamed Meat or Sea Food_

Add to medium white sauce cut-up cooked chicken, turkey, veal, pork,
ham, tuna, salmon, shrimp, crabmeat, or lobster.

• _Meat or Sea Food à la King_

To creamed meat or sea food, add sautéed mushrooms, sliced hard-cooked
eggs, chopped pimientos, etc.

• _Curried Meat or Sea Food_

Add a little curry powder when making white sauce for creamed meat or
sea food. Delicious with chicken, lamb, veal, shrimp. With it, offer
several relishes, such as chopped salted peanuts, ground fresh coconut,
chutney, sweet pickled onions, hard-cooked egg put through a sieve,
chopped pickle, and chopped crisp bacon.


                    Oven-Crisp Chicken and Biscuits

  1 cup Bisquick
  2 tsp. salt
  ¼ tsp. pepper
  2 tsp. paprika
  ½ cup shortening (half butter)
  1 cut-up frying chicken

Heat oven to 425° (hot). Mix first four ingredients in paper bag. Place
shortening in oblong pan, 13×9½×2″ and set in oven to melt. Shake
chicken in bag to coat thoroughly. Place chicken, skin-side-down, in
single layer in hot shortening. Bake _45 min._; then turn. Meanwhile,
make Rolled Biscuit dough (recipe page 3). Roll dough ¼″ thick and cut
into biscuits. Push chicken to one side in pan; place biscuits in single
layer on other side. Bake _another 15 min._, or until biscuits are
lightly browned and chicken tender. Place chicken and biscuits on
serving platter. For gravy, add 2 tbsp. Bisquick (saved from dredgings)
to drippings in pan. Bring to boil. Add 1½ cups hot water. Boil 1 min.
_4 servings._


                 Asparagus Shortcake with Cheese Sauce

Heat oven to 450° (hot). Make Biscuit dough (recipe page 3). Roll out ¼″
thick. Cut into 4 or 5″ rounds. Bake _about 10 min._ Split. Serve
sandwich-fashion with about 5 spears of freshly cooked asparagus between
biscuit halves. Make _Cheese Sauce_ by heating 1½ cups medium white
sauce, 2 cups grated sharp cheese (½ lb.), ¼ tsp. dry mustard, and few
grains thyme over hot water until cheese melts. Pour over top. Garnish
with sprig of parsley. _4 to 5 servings._




                         Muffins or Coffee Cake


    [Illustration: Muffins]

  2 tbsp. sugar
  1 egg
  ¾ cup milk
  2 cups Bisquick

Heat oven to 400° (mod. hot). Blend ingredients together. Then beat
vigorously 30 seconds.

_Muffins_: Fill well greased muffin pans ⅔ full. Bake _15 min. Makes
12._

_Coffee Cake_: Spread into greased 9″ round layer pan, or 8 or 9″ square
pan. Sprinkle with mixture of 2 tsp. cinnamon, ¼ cup sugar, 2 tbsp.
Bisquick, 2 tbsp. soft butter. Blend with fork until crumbly. Bake _20
to 25 min._

    [Illustration: Muffin dress-ups]

 _Dress up your muffins 4 ways_
      Kind              Add to recipe                  Serve with

 Bacon           Fold ¼ cup crisp, diced,     cottage cheese and fruit
                 cooked bacon into batter.    salad
 Cheese          Add ½ to 1 cup grated,       any meat casserole
                 sharp, yellow cheese.
 Chive           Fold ¼ cup chopped chives    salmon loaf
                 into batter.
 Orange          Use ½ cup orange juice for   ham and eggs
                 ½ cup of the milk. Sprinkle
                 top of batter with sugar.


                     Chili Supper and Corn Muffins

    [Illustration: Chili supper and corn muffins]

  1 lb. ground beef
  ½ cup chopped onion
  2 tbsp. fat or drippings
  1½ tsp. salt
  ½ tsp. pepper
  ½ tsp. chili powder (more if desired)
  2 cups cooked tomatoes (no. 2 can)
  2 cups cooked kidney beans (no. 2 can), drained

Brown beef and onion in fat in heavy skillet. Season with salt, pepper,
and chili powder. Stir in tomatoes and kidney beans. Cover and simmer
gently about 1 hr., stirring occasionally. Serve hot over Corn Muffins
(recipe below). _6 servings._

_Corn Muffins_: Heat oven to 450° (hot). Mix 1¼ cups Bisquick, ¾ cup
corn meal, ½ tsp. salt, 2 tbsp. sugar, 1 egg, and ¾ cup milk and beat
well with rotary beater. Fill greased medium muffin cups ⅔ full. Bake
_15 to 20 min. Makes 12._


                          Special Coffee Cakes


                         Apple Chip Brunch Cake

    [Illustration: Apple chip brunch cake]

Heat oven to 400° (mod. hot). Add 2 tbsp. sugar, 2 tbsp. melted
shortening to Coffee Cake (recipe page 8). Fold in 1 cup finely chopped
pared apples. Spread in greased 9″ round layer pan, or 9″ square pan.
Sprinkle with topping made by blending until crumbly, 2 tsp. cinnamon, ¼
cup sugar, 2 tbsp. Bisquick, and 2 tbsp. soft butter. Bake _20 to 25
min._


                Prune, Apricot, or Pineapple Coffee Cake

    [Illustration: Coffee cake]

Heat oven to 400° (mod. hot). Make Coffee Cake (recipe page 8). Spread
into greased 8″ round layer pan or 9″ square pan. Spread with 2 tbsp.
butter, melted. Sprinkle with ¼ cup white or brown sugar (¾ tsp.
cinnamon for prune topping). Arrange over top, 1 cup chopped, drained,
cooked prunes or apricots or 1 cup drained crushed pineapple. Bake _20
to 25 min._




                               Dumplings


    [Illustration: Dumplings]

    [Illustration: Making dumplings]

Add ¾ cup milk to 2 cups Bisquick. Mix thoroughly with fork. Drop by
spoonfuls onto chicken, meat, or vegetables in boiling stew (not into
liquid). Cook over low heat for 10 minutes with kettle uncovered and 10
minutes with kettle covered. Liquid should just bubble gently. Remove
dumplings. _Makes 10 to 12._

 _Dress up your dumplings 5 ways_
      Kind              Add to recipe                  Serve with

 Corn            ¾ cup whole kernel corn, 1   beef stew
                 tbsp. chopped onion
 Walnut-Celery   ½ cup coarsely chopped       chicken fricassee
                 walnuts, ½ cup finely
                 chopped celery
 Raisin          ½ cup raisins                chicken fricassee
 Mint            ½ tsp. dried mint            lamb stew
 Pimiento-Green  2 tbsp. each chopped         veal stew
    Pepper       pimiento and green pepper


               Chicken Fricassee with Bisquick Dumplings

    [Illustration: Chicken fricassee with dumplings]

  1 chicken (4 to 5 lb.) cut up
  ¼ cup fat
  2 sprigs parsley
  4 celery tops
  1 carrot, sliced
  1 slice of onion
  2 tsp. salt
  ⅛ tsp. pepper

Brown chicken slowly in fat. Place in kettle with just enough boiling
water to cover. Add rest of ingredients. Boil 5 min. Turn down heat and
simmer until tender (2 to 3 hr.). Prepare and cook Dumplings (recipe
page 10)—except add ¼ cup chopped parsley. Remove dumplings and chicken
and place on platter. Keep hot while making Gravy (recipe below). _8
servings._

_Gravy_: Leave chicken broth (about 4 cups) in kettle over low heat.
Skim off excess fat. Mix ½ cup Bisquick and 1 cup milk or cold water to
a smooth paste. Stir into broth. Cook until thickened (about 15 min.)
stirring occasionally. Season to taste.


                  Sauerkraut with Franks and Dumplings

Add 2 cups water to two no. 303 cans sauerkraut in saucepan. Simmer 30
minutes. Bury 8 frankfurters (or 1 lb.) in sauerkraut. Prepare and cook
½ Dumplings (recipe page 10). Add ½ tsp. caraway seeds, if desired.
Serve hot. _4 servings._


                           Pork and Dumplings

Brown 6 pork chops in deep skillet or heavy kettle. Season. Add 1 medium
onion, thinly sliced, and ¼ cup water. Cover skillet; simmer until meat
is tender (40 to 50 min.). Add 1½ to 3 cups water. Prepare and cook
Dumplings (recipe page 10). Remove meat and dumplings to hot platter
while making gravy. _6 servings._


                           Dessert Dumplings

Mix in saucepan 3 tbsp. Bisquick, 3 tbsp. sugar, and ¼ tsp. salt.
Gradually stir in 1½ cups juice from canned fruit. Bring to boil; boil
gently 2 min. stirring constantly. Stir in 1 cup canned or fresh fruit,
2 to 3 tsp. lemon juice, ½ tsp. grated lemon or orange rind, and ¹/₁₆
tsp. nutmeg or cinnamon. Prepare and cook Dumplings (recipe page 10).
Serve immediately. _6 servings._




                               Nut Bread


    [Illustration: Nut bread]

    [Illustration: Making nut bread]

  ½ cup sugar
  1 egg
  1¼ cups milk
  3 cups Bisquick
  1½ cups chopped Diamond Walnuts

Heat oven to 350° (mod.). Mix sugar, egg, milk, and Bisquick. Then beat
vigorously for 30 seconds. Batter may still be slightly lumpy. Stir in
Diamond Walnuts. Pour into well greased loaf pan, 9×5×3″. Bake _45 to 50
min._, until toothpick stuck into center comes out clean. Crack in top
is typical. Cool before slicing.


                            Banana Nut Bread

    [Illustration: Bananas]

Follow Nut Bread recipe (page 12)—except use ¾ cup sugar and only ½ cup
milk. Use only ¾ cup chopped nuts and add 1 cup mashed bananas (2 to 3
bananas).


                            Orange Nut Bread

    [Illustration: Oranges]

Follow Nut Bread recipe (page 12)—except use ¾ cup sugar and instead of
milk use orange juice plus 1 tbsp. grated orange rind. Use only ¾ cup
chopped nuts. Bake _50 to 55 min._


                            Fruit Nut Bread

    [Illustration: Fruit]

Follow Nut Bread recipe (page 12)—except use ¾ cup sugar and instead of
milk use orange juice. Use only ¾ cup chopped nuts and add 1 cup chopped
dried apricots or other dried fruit. Bake _55 to 60 min._


                         Orange-Honey Nut Bread

    [Illustration: Oranges and honey]

Follow Nut Bread recipe (page 12)—except use only ¼ cup sugar and add ½
cup honey. Instead of 1¼ cups milk, use only ¾ cup orange juice plus 1
tbsp. grated orange rind. Use only ¾ cup chopped nuts.


                           Little Gift Breads

    [Illustration: Gift loaf]

Bake them in cans! Follow Nut Bread recipe (page 12) or any of the
variations. Divide batter between 3 well greased no. 2 cans or 5 well
greased soup cans, filling cans slightly more than half full. Bake
uncovered no. 2 cans _45 to 50 min._; soup cans _about 40 min._ in _mod.
oven_ (350°) until toothpick stuck into center comes out clean.


                  _Serving, Storing, Freezing Ideas_:

• Cool thoroughly before slicing. Use thin sharp knife to prevent
crumbling.

• Nut bread slices spread with cream cheese are delicious for teas as
well as lunch boxes.

• Nut breads with the orange juice base are an excellent bread for
mailing as a gift.

• Individual round nut breads make attractive gifts for Christmas and
other holidays.

• Nut breads will keep a week in the refrigerator if wrapped tightly in
aluminum foil, and will keep well wrapped in foil in the freezer.




                          Pancakes and Waffles


    [Illustration: _Waffles are topped with cherry jam, pancakes stacked
    with 1 cup warm chunk pineapple._]

_Pancakes_: Add 1⅔ cups milk and 1 egg to 2 cups Bisquick. Beat with
rotary beater until smooth. Grease griddle if necessary. Turn pancakes
when bubbles appear. Between bakings, stir to thin out batter. _Makes
about 18 pancakes._

_For thinner pancakes, use 2 cups milk._

_Waffles_: Follow Pancake recipe—except add 2 tbsp. cooking (salad) oil
or melted shortening. Waffles are baked when they stop steaming. _Makes
2 large or 6 small._

_Note_: Griddle or waffle iron is right temperature for baking when a
few drops of water sprinkled on it jump around.

 _Dress up your pancakes or waffles 8 ways_
      Kind              Add to recipe                  Serve with

 Banana          1 cup mashed ripe bananas    honey, currant jelly, or
                 (2 med.), 1 tbsp. lemon      confectioners’ sugar.
                 juice, and 2 tbsp. sugar.
 Blueberry       2 tbsp. sugar. Then fold in  honey or confectioners’
                 1 cup fresh or drained       sugar.
                 canned blueberries.
 Corn            1 cup cream style or         syrup, creamed dried beef
                 drained whole kernel corn    or ham, or white sauce and
                 with ½ tsp. paprika.         bacon.
 Cheese          ½ to 1½ cups grated, sharp   syrup, creamed meats or
                 cheese.                      vegetables.
 Ham             1 to 1½ cups chopped cooked  syrup, cranberry sauce,
                 ham.                         cheese sauce, creamed
                                              vegetables.
 Nut             ¾ to 1 cup finely chopped    syrup, ice cream and
                 pecans, peanuts, or walnuts  caramel sauce.
                 (toasted, if desired).
 Onion           1 to 1½ cups finely chopped  browned ground beef and
                 onion, sautéed until golden  gravy.
                 brown in 2 or 3 tbsp. fat.
 Spicy           1 tsp. cinnamon, ½ tsp.      syrup or sweetened
                 allspice, ½ tsp. cloves,     applesauce.
                 and ½ tsp. nutmeg.

_Chiffon Waffles_: Follow recipe for Puff Pancakes (below) but use a
waffle baker.

_Chocolate Waffles_: Make Waffles (recipe page 14)—except add ½ cup
sugar and 2 sq. unsweetened chocolate (2 oz.), melted, to batter.

    [Illustration: Making pancakes]

_Rich Pancakes_: Make Pancakes (recipe page 14)—except use 1¼ cups milk,
2 eggs, and 2 tbsp. cooking (salad) oil or melted shortening.

_Puff Pancakes_: Beat 2 eggs with rotary beater until soft peaks form.
Blend in 1 cup milk. Add 2⅓ cups Bisquick and 2 tbsp. sugar. Mix just
until thoroughly dampened. Fold in ¼ cup cooking (salad) oil or melted
shortening. Spoon onto medium-hot ungreased griddle. When puffed up, and
bubbles begin to break, cook on other side. Serve with syrup or as
dessert with warm fruit, such as strawberries, and whipped cream. _Makes
15 to 20 pancakes._




                   Main dish pancakes and waffles ...


                          Tuna Royal Pancakes

    [Illustration: Tuna royal pancakes]

  Pancakes (recipe page 14)
  7-oz. can tuna, drained and broken
  ¼ cup chopped onion
  ½ cup grated Parmesan or processed cheese
  ½ cup chopped celery
  ¼ cup chopped pimiento
  about 2 tsp. lemon juice
  10½-oz. can cream of celery or chicken soup
  2 tbsp. Bisquick
  ¼ tsp. salt
  ⅛ tsp. pepper
  2 cups milk

Heat oven to 400° (mod. hot). Make 10 thinner pancakes (5″ size). Keep
warm between towels until ready to serve. Mix tuna, onion, ¼ cup of the
cheese, celery, pimiento, and lemon juice. Spoon 2 tbsp. of mixture on
each pancake. Roll and place folded side down in 11½×7½×1½″ oblong
baking dish. Heat in oven _about 10 min._ Mix soup, Bisquick, salt,
pepper, and milk. Heat until thickened. Pour over pancakes and sprinkle
with the remaining ¼ cup grated cheese. If desired, place under broiler
until bubbly. _10 servings._


                          Waffle Supper Royal

    [Illustration: Waffle supper royal]

Serve waffles with creamed chicken or turkey and top with whole
cranberry sauce. Wonderful Sunday supper!


                           Waffle Club Rabbit

Make Waffles (recipe page 14) using 2 cups milk. Bake until very crisp
and brown. Serve waffles (whole or sections) with a slice or more of
fresh tomato arranged on each serving. Spoon Cheese Sauce (recipe below)
over, then top with strips of crisp bacon.

_Cheese Sauce_: Mix 1½ cups medium white sauce, 2 cups grated sharp
Cheddar cheese (½ lb.). If desired, add ¼ tsp. dry mustard and few
grains thyme. Heat slowly until cheese melts and blends with sauce. _6
servings._


                         Chicken Griddle Cakes

    [Illustration: Chicken Griddle Cakes]

Make 8 large Pancakes (recipe page 14) using about ½ cup batter for
each. Spoon ¼ cup Creamed Chicken (recipe below) onto half of each
pancake. Fold over other half. Place on baking sheet. Sprinkle 1 tbsp.
grated sharp cheese over each cake. Slip under broiler or in oven for a
moment to melt cheese. _8 servings._

_Creamed Chicken_: Melt 2 tbsp. butter. Remove from heat. Blend in ¼ cup
Bisquick and 1 tsp. salt. Gradually stir in 1½ cups milk. Bring to boil
over low heat, stirring constantly. Boil 1 min. Stir in 2 cups finely
diced cooked chicken. Season to taste with pepper and poultry seasoning.
Heat until chicken is hot.




                      Brunch and dessert pancakes


                       Sunday in Vermont Pancakes

Grate an apple into batter for Pancakes (recipe page 14). Make large
pancakes 5″ across. Stack five high with warm cranberry sauce between
layers. Sprinkle confectioners’ sugar on top. Cut in wedges. Serve
immediately.


                    Spiced Cherry Sauce for Pancakes

Mix ¾ cup sugar, 3 tbsp. cornstarch, ¼ tsp. cinnamon, and ⅛ tsp. salt in
small saucepan. Add 1 cup chopped cherries (canned or fresh), 1 tbsp.
lemon juice, and 1 cup water (or juice from canned cherries). Bring to
boil over direct heat, stirring constantly. Boil 1 min. Serve hot.
_Makes about 1½ cups sauce._


                          Colonial Jelly Stack

Make Pancakes (recipe page 14). Use ½ cup batter for each pancake. Place
1 pancake on warm plate and while piping hot spread generously with soft
butter and jelly. Top with second pancake. Spread and repeat until they
are 6 high. Sprinkle top with confectioners’ sugar. Cut stack into
wedges. Serve hot. _6 servings._


                               Maple Whip

Cream ½ cup _soft_ butter. Add 1 cup maple-flavored syrup gradually.
Beat until smooth and spreading consistency. Serve on hot pancakes or
waffles. This can be refrigerated for future use.


                          Strawberry Blintzes

    [Illustration: Strawberry blintzes]

  Pancakes (recipe page 14)
  1 cup cottage cheese (small curd)
  4-oz. pkg. cream cheese
  1½ tbsp. lemon rind
  3 tbsp. lemon juice
  ¼ cup sugar
  10-oz. pkg. frozen strawberries (thawed)
  1 tbsp. lemon juice
  ¼ tsp. almond extract

Heat oven to 400° (mod. hot). Combine cottage cheese, cream cheese,
lemon rind, the 3 tbsp. lemon juice, and sugar; whip until creamy. Place
¼ cup filling on each pancake and roll up. Place rolled side down in
11×7″ baking dish. Heat in oven for _10 min._ just before serving. Heat
the strawberries, the 1 tbsp. lemon juice, and almond extract. Spoon
over pancakes. Serve immediately. _6 servings._


                           Quantity Pancakes

                      For 60 Pancakes. Serves 15.

           10 cups Bisquick (40-oz. pkg. or two 20-oz. pkg.)
                              8⅓ cups milk
                                 5 eggs

                      For 100 Pancakes. Serves 25.

                     15 cups Bisquick (60-oz. pkg.)
                               3 qt. milk
                                 7 eggs

Add milk and eggs to Bisquick. Beat with rotary beater until smooth.
Bake as directed on page 14.




                               Shortcake


    [Illustration: Strawberry shortcake]

Heat oven to 450° (hot). Add ¾ cup cream (or ½ cup milk plus ¼ cup
butter, melted) to 2 cups Bisquick. Add 2 tbsp. sugar, if desired. Mix
thoroughly with fork. Keep dough soft; if too sticky, add Bisquick.
Knead 10 times on floured surface. Pat or roll dough to half the
thickness desired in baked shortcakes. Shortcakes double in volume
during baking. Cut into individual shortcakes with floured cutter. Bake
_about 10 min._ Split. Butter, if desired. Place fruit between layers
and over top. _Makes six 3″ shortcakes. For 1 large shortcake_, pat out
½ dough in round layer pan, 8×1½″, dot with butter. Pat out rest of
dough, and place over top. _Bake 15 to 20 min._

    [Illustration: Strawberries]


                     Double-Decker Fruit Shortcake

Heat oven to 400° (mod. hot). Make Shortcake dough (recipe page 18) and
roll into two 8″ square pieces. Fit one piece into an 8″ square pan,
pressing dough about ½″ up sides of pan. Be careful to press together
any tears in the dough. Spread 2 cups washed fresh raspberries or
blueberries over dough, sprinkle with ¼ to ½ cup sugar. Cover with the
other square of dough. Bake _about 25 min._, until well browned. Cut
into squares and serve warm or cold with Sauce (recipe below). _9
servings._

_Sauce_: Mix ½ cup sugar and 1 tbsp. cornstarch in saucepan. Stir in ¼
cup cold water, ¼ cup butter, and 1 cup washed fresh raspberries or
blueberries, mashed. Bring to a boil and boil 1 min.


                               Fruit Roll

    [Illustration: Fruit roll]

Heat oven to 450° (hot). Measure ¾ cup sugar and ½ cup water into a 9″
square pan. Bring to a boil and boil 1 min. Make Shortcake dough (recipe
page 18). Roll ¼″ thick into an oblong, 15×7″. Spread with 2 cups fresh
fruit or well drained canned fruit. Sprinkle with ¼ cup sugar. Roll up
beginning at wide side. Seal well by pinching edge of dough into roll.
Cut into 9 slices about 1½″ thick. Place slices cut-side-up in the pan
of hot syrup. Bake _about 25 min._, until golden brown. Serve warm with
cream, if desired. _9 servings._


                            Winter Shortcake

    [Illustration: Pineapple and apple]

  1 cup canned crushed pineapple (9-oz. can)
  1 cup finely chopped or shredded red-skinned apple (1 med. to large
          apple)
  1 cup finely chopped fresh cranberries (1 cup whole cranberries)
  ¼ cup sugar
  ⅛ tsp. salt

Mix all ingredients. Let stand at room temperature ½ to 1 hr. before
serving. Make Shortcake dough (recipe page 18). Cut individual
shortcakes. Split while piping hot and serve shortcake style with the
fruit mixture. _6 servings._


                         Peach-Orange Shortcake

    [Illustration: Peach and Orange]

Heat oven to 450° (hot). Make Shortcake dough (recipe page 18)—except
add grated rind of 1 orange to Bisquick before adding liquid. Spread
dough in greased 13×9½×2″ pan. Sprinkle with 2 tbsp. sugar, if desired.
Bake _10 to 12 min._ Cut into 12 squares. For each serving, spoon sliced
peaches between 2 squares and on top. Top with whipped cream. _6
servings._


                    Sour Cream-Strawberry Shortcake

Make Shortcake dough (recipe page 18). Cut individual shortcakes. Split
layers. Spoon frozen strawberries and commercial sour cream between
layers and over top.




                           Velvet Crumb Cake


    [Illustration: Velvet crumb cake]

  1⅓ cups Bisquick
  ¾ cup sugar
  3 tbsp. soft shortening
  1 egg
  ¾ cup milk
  1 tsp. vanilla

    [Illustration: Making velvet crumb cake]

Heat oven to 350° (mod.). Grease and flour a square pan, 8×8×2″ or a
round layer pan, 9×1½″. Mix Bisquick, sugar. Add shortening, egg, ¼ cup
of milk. Beat vigorously 1 min. Stir in gradually remaining milk,
vanilla. Beat ½ min. Pour into prepared pan. Bake _35 to 40 min._


                          Broiled Toppings ...

While cake is warm spread on any one of these toppings and broil 3″ from
heat.

_Honey Crisp Topping_: Cream until fluffy 3 tbsp. soft butter and ⅓ cup
honey. Mix in thoroughly ¼ cup shredded coconut, ½ cup crushed Wheaties,
and ½ cup drained crushed pineapple.

_Broiled Orange Glaze_: Mix 2 tbsp. soft butter, 3 tbsp. Bisquick, ¼
tsp. cinnamon, 2 tbsp. grated orange rind, and ¼ cup brown sugar
(packed).

_Broiled Peanut Butter Topping_: Mix 2 tbsp. soft butter or other
shortening, ⅓ cup brown sugar (packed), 2 tbsp. cream or top milk, ½ cup
chopped peanuts, and 2 tbsp. peanut butter.


                           Other Toppings ...

_Peach-Apricot Jam Topping_: Spread ½ cup apricot or peach jam or
preserves over the hot cake.

_Streusel Topping_: Mix with fork ¼ cup Bisquick, 2 tsp. cinnamon, 2
tbsp. brown sugar, and 1 tbsp. soft butter. Sprinkle on cake before
baking.


                     Velvet Crumb Upside-down Cake

    [Illustration: Upside-down cake]

Melt over low heat 2 tbsp. butter in an 8″ square pan. Sprinkle with ¼
cup brown sugar. Arrange fresh or well drained canned fruit over sugar.
Make Velvet Crumb Cake (recipe page 20)—except pour batter over fruit in
pan. Bake _35 to 40 min._ Invert pan at once on serving plate. Allow pan
to remain over cake for a few minutes.


                      Orange-Nut Velvet Crumb Cake

    [Illustration: Orange-nut velvet crumb cake]

Make Velvet Crumb Cake (recipe page 20)—except add ½ tsp. nutmeg, ½ tsp.
orange extract, ½ cup seedless raisins or currants, ¼ cup chopped nuts,
and 2 tbsp. grated orange rind with the shortening. Bake _about 30 min._
Serve warm with whipped cream.


                           Velvet Fudge Cake

Make Velvet Crumb Cake (recipe page 20)—except add ⅓ cup cocoa to the
Bisquick. Pour half of batter into prepared pan. Spread with half of
Chocolate Coconut Topping (recipe below). Pour remaining batter into
pan. Bake _35 to 40 min._ Immediately spread with rest of topping. Serve
warm.

_Chocolate-Coconut Topping_: Mix ½ cup (½ pkg.) semi-sweet chocolate
pieces, melted, ⅓ cup water, 2 cups finely chopped coconut.


                        Velvet Crumb Spice Cake

Make Velvet Crumb Cake (recipe page 20)—except use ¾ cup brown sugar
(packed) in place of white. Add ½ tsp. cinnamon, ¼ tsp. _each_ cloves,
allspice, and nutmeg with Bisquick. Bake _about 30 min._ Serve warm with
a topping.


                         Velvet Crumb Shortcake

Make Velvet Crumb Cake (recipe page 20). Cut cake into 6 to 9 pieces
while still warm. Spoon sweetened sliced strawberries between split
pieces and on top.

    [Illustration: Yeast Rolls]




                              Yeast Baking


                          Hurry-up Yeast Rolls

    [Illustration: 1. Dissolve 1 pkg. active dry yeast in ¾ cup warm
    water (not hot—105° to 115°). Mix in 2½ cups Bisquick. Beat
    vigorously.]

    [Illustration: 2. Turn dough onto surface well dusted with Bisquick.
    Knead until smooth, about 20 times.]

    [Illustration: 3. Shape into 12 pan rolls. Place in greased 8″ round
    layer pan.]

    [Illustration: 4. Place pan of rolls on wire rack over a bowl of hot
    water and cover with towel; let rise about 1 hr.

    Heat oven to 400° (mod. hot). Bake _10 to 15 min._, until a rich
    golden brown. Brush with butter after baking. Serve hot. _Makes
    16._]

1. Water temperature for dissolving yeast is right when it is slightly
warmer than lukewarm. Too hot water kills the yeast; too cool water
retards rising.

2. Rolls are ready to bake when dough is puffy and light and slight
indentation remains in dough when pressed gently with finger.


                          Variations in Shapes


                             Crescent Rolls

    [Illustration: Crescent rolls]

Roll dough into 12″ circle. Cut into 16 wedges. Beginning at wide side
roll toward point. Place on greased baking sheet with point underneath.


                            Clothespin Rolls

    [Illustration: Clothespin rolls]

Divide dough into 16 to 18 strips. Roll each on board with palms of
hands into 12″ lengths. Wrap strips around greased clothespins so edges
barely touch.


                                 Knots

    [Illustration: Knots]

Make strips (as above). Twist and tie each strip into a knot. Press ends
down on greased baking sheet.


                           More yeast bakings


                                 Pizza

                        (Makes four 10″ Pizzas)

    [Illustration: Pizza]

Follow directions for Yeast dough (recipe page 23) through the kneading.
Divide dough into 4 pieces. Roll each piece paper-thin into a circle,
about 10″ in diameter. Place on ungreased baking sheets or in shallow
pie pans. No rising! Top with:

  ¾ cup chopped onion
  1 clove garlic, chopped
  2 cups tomato sauce
  1 cup chopped salami or cooked Italian sausage or 2 cans anchovies,
          chopped
  salt and pepper to taste
  2½ cups grated Mozzarella cheese or two 6-oz. pkg. sliced Mozzarella
          cheese (cut into thin strips)

Mix onion, garlic, tomato sauce, salami, salt, and pepper and spread on
dough. Sprinkle grated cheese over all or lay cheese strips on top.
Sprinkle with oregano to desired taste. _Heat oven to 425°_ (hot). Bake
_15 to 20 min._, until crust is brown and filling hot and bubbly. Serve
immediately. Unbaked pizza may stand while others are baking.


                           Individual Pizzas

Divide dough into 8 pieces and roll each piece into 5″ circles. Spread
with filling and bake.


                              Easy Pizzas

Divide dough in half and roll each part on a baking sheet as thin as
desired. Spread with filling.


                          Italian Bread Sticks

    [Illustration: Bread sticks]

Follow directions for Yeast dough (recipe page 23). Divide dough into 16
equal parts. Roll each piece between hands into pencil-like strips 8″
long. Melt ¼ cup butter. Spread part of butter in bottom of 13×9½×2″
oblong pan. Put strips of dough in pan. Brush tops with rest of butter.
Sprinkle with caraway seeds, poppy seeds, celery seeds, sesame seeds, or
garlic salt. Cover with damp cloth. Let rise in warm place (85°) until
light, about 1 hr. _Heat oven to 425°_ (hot). Bake _15 min._, until
light golden brown. Turn oven off. Allow bread sticks to remain in oven
15 more minutes to crisp.


                       Bisquick Herb Yeast Rolls

Follow directions for Yeast dough (recipe page 23)—except add ¼ tsp.
nutmeg, ½ tsp. sage, and 1 tsp. caraway seeds to the Bisquick.


                       Mustard Buns for Hot Dogs

Follow directions for Yeast dough (recipe page 23)—except add 2 level
tbsp. prepared mustard. Divide dough into 8 pieces; shape like a hot dog
bun.


                               Onion Buns

Follow directions for Yeast dough (recipe page 23)—except add ½ cup
finely chopped onion and use 2⅔ cups Bisquick. Divide dough into 10
portions and shape in oblongs or rounds. Good with wieners and
hamburgers.


                          Hawaiian Yeast Rolls

    [Illustration: Hawaiian yeast Rolls]

  ¾ cup drained crushed pineapple
  ½ cup brown sugar (packed)
  ¼ cup soft butter
  ½ cup warm water (not hot—105 to 115°)
  1 pkg. active dry yeast
  1 egg
  1 tbsp. granulated sugar
  2½ cups Bisquick
  2 tbsp. butter
  ¼ cup brown sugar (packed)

Mix pineapple, ½ cup brown sugar, and ¼ cup butter. Divide among 12
large greased muffin cups. Prepare dough by dissolving yeast in water.
Mix in egg, 1 tbsp. sugar, and Bisquick; beat vigorously. Turn dough
onto surface well dusted with Bisquick. Knead until smooth, about 20
times. Roll into a rectangle, 16×9″. Spread with rest of ingredients.
Roll up tightly beginning at wide side. Seal well by pinching edge of
dough into roll. Slice into 12. Place in prepared muffin cups. Place pan
of rolls on wire rack over bowl of hot water and cover with towel; let
rise 1 hr. _Heat oven to 400°_ (mod. hot). Bake _15 min._ Invert pan;
serve.


                              Caramel Buns

  ¼ cup soft butter
  ⅓ cup brown sugar (packed)
  1 tsp. light corn syrup
  ⅓ cup pecans or walnuts
  ¾ cup warm water (not hot—105 to 115°)
  1 pkg. active dry yeast
  2½ cups Bisquick
  2 tbsp. soft butter
  ¼ cup brown sugar (packed)
  1 tsp. cinnamon

Melt butter; add brown sugar and corn syrup. Bring syrup mixture to a
rolling boil. Spread in 8″ round layer pan. Add pecans. Dissolve yeast
in warm water. Mix in Bisquick and beat vigorously. Turn dough onto
surface well dusted with Bisquick. Knead until smooth, about 20 times.
Roll out into rectangle, 16×9″. Spread with butter, sugar, and cinnamon.
Roll up tightly beginning at wide side. Seal well by pinching edge of
dough into roll. Slice into 10 slices. Place in pan. Place pan of rolls
on wire rack over bowl of hot water and cover with towel; let rise 1 hr.
_Heat oven to 400°_ (mod. hot). Bake _20 to 25 min._ Invert pan and
serve rolls warm.


                              Orange Rolls

    [Illustration: Oranges and rolls]

Follow recipe for Hawaiian Yeast Rolls (above)—except substitute ½ cup
orange juice, ½ cup sugar, and 2 tbsp. grated orange rind for the first
two ingredients. Mix the orange juice, ½ cup sugar, orange rind, and ¼
cup butter in saucepan. Cook 2 min. over low heat. Divide among 12
muffin cups.




                        More Bisquick favorites


                        Berry Chiffon Short Pie

    [Illustration: Berries and pie slice]

  ¼ cup sugar
  1 envelope unflavored gelatin (1 tbsp.)
  10-oz. pkg. frozen raspberries or strawberries, thawed
  3 egg whites
  ¼ tsp. cream of tartar
  ⅓ cup sugar
  ½ cup whipping cream, whipped

Blend in saucepan sugar, gelatin, raspberries. Bring to full rolling
boil, stirring constantly. Cool pan in cold water until mixture mounds
slightly when dropped from a spoon. Add cream of tartar to egg whites,
beat until frothy. Gradually beat in sugar and beat until meringue holds
stiff peaks. Fold berry mixture into meringue. Carefully fold in whipped
cream. Pile into cooled baked Short Pie shell (recipe below). Chill
several hours until set.


                            Short Pie Shell

    [Illustration: Short pie shell]

  1 cup Bisquick
  ¼ cup soft butter (½ stick)
  3 tbsp. boiling water

Heat oven to 450° (hot). Put Bisquick and butter in 9″ pie pan. Add
boiling water and stir vigorously with fork until dough forms a ball and
cleans the pan. Dough will be puffy and soft. With fingers and heel of
hand, pat dough evenly into pie pan, bringing up dough to edge of pan.
This may seem skimpy but will not be when baked. Flute edges. Bake _8 to
10 min._ Fill with ice cream or other fillings.


                             Fruit Cobbler

    [Illustration: Fruit cobbler]

Heat oven to 400° (mod. hot). Heat 2½ cups (no. 2 can) canned fruit or
berries and juice (or 3 cups fresh fruit and ¾ cup water). Sweeten to
taste. Blend in 1 tbsp. cornstarch dissolved in 2 tbsp. cold water.
Bring to a boil; boil 1 min. Pour into 2-qt. baking dish. Dot with
butter. Sprinkle with cinnamon. Drop ½ Fruit Shortcake Dough (recipe
page 18) by spoonfuls over top. Bake about _20 min._ Serve hot with
cream. _6 to 8 servings._


                            Short Pie Rounds

Prepare Short Pie dough (above)—except divide dough into 6 parts.
Flatten each part into 3 or 4″ rounds on baking sheet. Flute edges. Bake
_about 8 min._ Serve on top of your favorite cooked fruit filling. _6
servings._


                             Ranch Pudding

  1 cup brown sugar (packed)
  2½ cups water
  2 tbsp. butter
  1 cup brown sugar (packed)
  ½ cup milk
  1¼ cups Bisquick
  1 cup raisins or chopped dates
  ½ to 1 cup chopped nuts
  1 tsp. vanilla

Heat oven to 350° (mod.). Mix 1 cup brown sugar, water, and butter in
saucepan. Boil 5 min. Pour into 8″ square pan. Mix rest of ingredients
in bowl. Spoon batter on top of sugar mixture. It will sink into the
liquid and will spread out as it bakes. Bake _45 min._ Serve warm with
plain or whipped cream. _9 servings._


                        Hot Sea Food Appetizers

Heat oven to 450° (hot). Make Rolled Biscuit dough (recipe page 3). Roll
dough ¼″ thick. Cut into biscuits 1″ in diameter. Place on baking sheet.
Bake _6 to 8 min._ Immediately split each baked biscuit. Spread with sea
food mixture. Sprinkle with grated sharp cheese, if desired. Replace
tops. Return to oven to heat through. Serve piping hot. _Makes about 60
tiny_ biscuits.


                           Filling variations

_Shrimp Spread_: Mix ½ cup flaked cooked shrimp (5-oz. can), 1 tbsp.
chopped pimiento, 1 tbsp. lemon juice, 3 tbsp. mayonnaise, and salt and
pepper to taste.

_Crabmeat Spread_: Use crabmeat in place of shrimp in the above spread.


                             Pronto Puppies

    [Illustration: Pronto puppies]

  1 egg
  ½ cup milk
  1 cup Bisquick
  2 tbsp. yellow corn meal
  ¼ tsp. paprika
  ½ tsp. dry mustard
  ⅛ tsp. cayenne
  1 lb. miniature or large frankfurters

Heat deep fat to 375°. Blend egg, milk. Stir in dry ingredients. Dip
frankfurters in batter. Fry until brown, _2 to 3 min._ on each side.
Serve miniature franks on cocktail picks. Slice large franks. To reheat:
Place in 400° oven about 5 min.


                        Doughnuts or Fried Balls

    [Illustration: Doughnuts]

  2 cups Bisquick
  ¼ cup sugar
  ⅓ cup milk
  1 tsp. vanilla
  1 egg
  ¼ tsp. _each_ cinnamon and nutmeg, if desired

Heat fat to 375°. Mix ingredients until well blended. Turn onto lightly
floured surface and knead about 10 times. Roll out ⅜″ thick. Cut with
floured doughnut cutter. Fry in hot fat until golden brown, about 1 min.
to a side. Take from fat and drain on absorbent paper. _Makes about 12
doughnuts._


                                Fritters

    [Illustration: Fritters]

Mix 2 cups Bisquick, ⅔ cup milk, 1 egg until well blended (batter will
be lumpy). Stir in 2 cups fruit or cooked vegetables, drained. Drop by
small teaspoonfuls into deep hot fat (360 to 375°). Turn and fry until
golden brown on both sides. Drain on absorbent paper. Serve hot with
syrup or confectioners’ sugar. _Makes 2 dozen._


                       Fried Chicken, Meats, Fish

For the crispiest coating you ever tasted, roll fresh fish, sea food,
chicken, or meat generously in Bisquick. Fry in a small amount of fat
until golden brown on both sides. Turn only once. Use leftover dredgings
for making gravy.




                                 INDEX


    [Illustration: Index]


                               APPETIZERS
  Hot Sea Food Appetizers, 27
  Pronto Puppies, 27


                                 BREADS
  Biscuits, 3-4
      Bacon, 4
      Buttermilk, 3
      Cheese, 4
      Chives, 4
      Curry, 4
      Drop, 3
      Ham, 4
      Herb, 4
      Lemon, 4
      Olive, 4
      Peanut, 4
      Pecan, 4
      Quantity, 4
      Richer, 3
      Salami, 4
  Butter Sticks, 4
  Caramel Buns, 25
  Coffee Cake, 8
      Apple Chip Brunch Cake, 9
      Prune, Apricot, or Pineapple, 9
  Dumplings, 10
      Corn, 11
      Dessert, 11
      Mint, 11
      Pimiento-Green Pepper, 11
      Raisin, 11
      Walnut-Celery, 11
  Hawaiian Yeast Rolls, 25
  Herb Yeast Rolls, 24
  Hurry-up Yeast Rolls, 23
      Clothespin Rolls, 23
      Crescent Rolls, 23
      Knots, 23
  Italian Bread Sticks, 24
  Muffins, 8
      Bacon, 8
      Cheese, 8
      Chive, 8
      Corn, 8
      Orange, 8
  Mustard Buns, 24
  Nut Bread, 12
      Baking in cans, 13
      Banana, 13
      Fruit, 13
      Orange-Honey, 13
      Orange, 13
      Serving, Storing, Freezing, 13
  Onion Buns, 24
  Orange Rolls, 25
  Pancakes, 14
      Banana, 15
      Blueberry, 15
      Cheese, 15
      Chicken Griddle Cakes, 16
      Colonial Jelly Stack, 17
      Corn, 15
      Ham, 15
      Maple Whip for, 17
      Nut, 15
      Onion,  15
      Pineapple, 14
      Puff, 15
      Quantity, 17
      Rich, 15
      Spicy, 15
      Thinner, 14
      Tuna Royal, 16
      Spiced Cherry Sauce for, 17
      Strawberry Blintzes,  17
      Sunday in Vermont, 17
  Waffles, 14
      Banana, 15
      Blueberry,  15
      Cheese, 15
      Chiffon,  15
      Chocolate, 15
      Corn, 15
      Ham,  15
      Nut, 15
      Onion, 15
      Spicy, 15
      Waffle Club Rabbit, 16
      Waffle Supper Royal, 16


                                 CAKES
  Orange-Nut Velvet Crumb Cake, 21
  Velvet Crumb Cake, 20
      Broiled Orange Glaze, 21
      Broiled Peanut Butter Topping, 21
      Honey Crisp Topping,  21
      Peach-Apricot Jam Topping, 21
      Streusel Topping, 21
  Velvet Crumb Shortcake, 21
  Velvet Crumb Spice Cake, 21
  Velvet Crumb Upside-down Cake, 21
  Velvet Fudge Cake, 21
      Chocolate Coconut Topping, 21


                                DESSERTS
  Berry Chiffon Short Pie, 26
  Double-decker Fruit Shortcake, 19
  Doughnuts or Fried Balls, 27
  Dumplings, 11
  Fritters, 27
  Fruit Cobbler, 26
  Fruit Roll, 19
  Peach-Orange Shortcake, 19
  Ranch Pudding, 26
  Short Pie, 26
  Short Pie Rounds, 26
  Shortcake, 18
  Sour Cream-Strawberry Shortcake, 19
  Winter Shortcake, 19


                              MAIN DISHES
  Baked Meat Sandwich, 6
  Chicken and Biscuits, Oven-crisp,  7
  Chicken Fricassee with Bisquick Dumplings, 11
  Chicken Pot Pie, 5
  Chili Supper and Corn Muffins, 9
  Fried Chicken, Meats, Fish,  27
  Fritters, 27
  Meat and Vegetable Pie, 5
  Meat Turnovers,  6
  Pizza, 24
      Easy, 24
      Individual, 24
  Pork and Dumplings, 11
  Salmon-Cheese Pie, Deep-dish, 5
  Saucy Pigs in Blankets, 6
  Sauerkraut with Franks and Dumplings, 11
  Shortcakes, 7
      Asparagus with Cheese Sauce,  7
      Creamed Meat or Sea Food, 7
      Curried Meat or Sea Food, 7
      Meat or Sea Food à la King, 7
  Tuna Pinwheel Roll, 6


                           SAUCES AND GRAVIES
  Cheese Sauce, 7
  Creamed Chicken, 16
  Gravy, 11
  Maple Whip for Pancakes, 17
  Spiced Cherry Sauce for Pancakes, 17




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Collated table of contents against actual headings: links work even
  though wording is not consistent.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 133 QUICKER WAYS TO HOMEMADE, WITH BISQUICK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.