[Illustration: SEPTEMBER, 1883.

VOL. XXXVII.

NO. 9.

The American Missionary]




CONTENTS


                                                         PAGE.


  EDITORIAL.

    ANNUAL MEETING—THIS NUMBER—FINANCIAL                  257
    THE NERVE OF MISSIONS                                 258
    THE JOHN BROWN STEAMER (drawing)                      259
    SECOND NATIONAL EDUCATION ASSEMBLY                    260
    HON. FREEMAN WALKER                                   261
    SIXTY YEARS IN THE HARVEST FIELD—GIFT BY A
        BOHEMIAN BOY                                      262
    BENEFACTIONS                                          263
    GENERAL NOTES                                         264
    VICTORIA FALLS, ZAMBESE RIVER (cut)                   266


  THE COLOR-LINE.

    OPINIONS FROM THE PRESS                               267


  BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

    FROM OUR LADY MISSIONARY, WILMINGTON, N.C.            279
    A VALUED WORKER GONE                                  279


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    CHUNG WAH                                             280
    A CHINESE GARDEN (cut)                                281


  RECEIPTS                                                282


  PROPOSED CONSTITUTION                                   286

                 *       *       *       *       *


                             NEW YORK:
         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,
                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.
          Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y.,
                      as second-class matter.

                 *       *       *       *       *




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


PRESIDENT.

  Hon. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


TREASURER.

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


AUDITORS.

  M. F. READING.
  WM. A. NASH.


EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman; A. P. FOSTER, Secretary; LYMAN
ABBOTT, ALONZO S. BALL, A. S. BARNES, C. T. CHRISTENSEN, FRANKLIN
FAIRBANKS, CLINTON B. FISK, S. B. HALLIDAY, SAMUEL HOLMES, CHARLES
A. HULL, SAMUEL S. MARPLES, CHARLES L. MEAD, WM. H. WARD, A. L.
WILLISTON


DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

  Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D., _Boston_.
  Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
  Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to
the Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting
fields, to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of
the “American Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New
York Office; letters for the Bureau of Woman’s Work, to Miss D. E.
Emerson, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As
closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted
CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its
humane and Christian policy toward the INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *




           How to Build a House with little or no Money.

[Illustration: A $900 COTTAGE

BUILT FROM ASSOCIATION PLANS.]


=HOW TO BUILD A HOUSE=, contains most approved designs for Villas,
Farm Houses, Cottages, and Suburban Residences, ranging in cost
from $350 to $20,000. 1 Vol., large quarto, 178 illustrations.
Price =50= cts.

=BARNS AND OUTHOUSES=, (=Just Published=) contains most practical
designs for Farm Barns, Stock Barns, Carriage Houses, Stables,
Dairies, Hog Houses, Chicken Houses, Artificial Rearing Apparatus,
Corn Cribs, Granaries, Smoke Hot Beds, Green Houses, Graperies, How
to lay out Farms and Gardens, designs for Lawn and Hanging Baskets,
Garden Vases, Fountains, and valuable illustrated articles on Cheap
Homes, Concrete Buildings. How to improve old Barns, etc. 1 Vol.,
large quarto, 200 illustrations. Price =50= cents.

“The wonder is that publications of this kind have not been
issued before.”—_N.Y. Weekly Witness._ “Precisely meets a want
which thousands have felt.”—_N.Y. Observer._ “The most practical
book we have ever seen.”—_Episcopal Methodist._ “A responsible
Association.”—_Christian at Work._—

These books must be seen to be appreciated—a mere circular or
catalogue can give no idea of their value. On receipt of =$1.00=
we send both books, post-paid, _for examination_. Both or either
can be returned, if not entirely satisfactory and the money will be
immediately refunded. Address,

              Co-operative Building Plan Association
  (_Mention this Paper._)      24 Beekman St., (Box 2702,) New York.


       *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

          VOL. XXXVII.      SEPTEMBER, 1883.      NO. 9.

                 *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Annual Meeting of the American Missionary Association will
convene in the Central Congregational Church, Brooklyn (Dr.
Behrends’), Oct. 30. For further information, see 4th page cover.

       *       *       *       *       *

WE present to our readers in this number of the _Missionary_ a
résumé, or broadside, on the Color-line. The interest of the public
on the question at issue is manifest from the constant series of
articles on the subject in the religious papers.

As to caste prejudice itself, we hold and wish to propagate
pronounced opinions. We believe it to be a sin and a curse; a
hindrance to Christian missions abroad, and a root of bitterness
that will trouble us in this country till it be eradicated. It
is a stone of stumbling to whites and blacks in the South, and
an element of discord in the nation. We, therefore, give these
extracts with the hope that they may promote the discussion and
aid in its final and right settlement. There are some good men and
true who have written on this subject in a tone other than we would
adopt, but we give extracts representing their views.

On the far less important question as to which missionary societies
shall do the work among the whites and blacks in the South, we
do not now express an opinion, and have no wish to influence the
opinions of anybody, believing, as we do, that no difficulties
on this score are likely to arise. On this point, therefore,
our extracts are made with the utmost endeavor at impartiality,
presenting them simply as showing fairly the drift of public
sentiment on the subject.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR receipts from collections and donations during the ten months
closing July 31, 1882, were $188,677.02; the collections and
donations for the same months this year have been $164,652.04, a
decrease of $24,024.98. The legacies for these months last year
were $74,152.29, while for this year they have been $64,594.65,
a decrease of $9,557.64. The total receipts for these months last
year in collections, donations and legacies were $262,829.31, while
for this year they have amounted to only $229,246.69, a decrease of
$33,582.62.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE John Brown Steamer, a drawing of which is given herewith, will
be ready for use at the Mendi Mission during the next dry season,
which commences about November 1.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NERVE OF MISSIONS.

The first effort on record, so far as we know, to cut the nerve of
missions, was made by Satan himself in the Garden of Eden when he
affirmed to our first parents, “Thou shalt not surely die.” The
reason for missions comes out in the great truth of Scripture,
that men are lost without the Gospel, and are saved only by the
Gospel. The advocacy of any view that relieves the mind of a
sense of the lost condition of unbelievers cuts at the nerve of
missions. The purpose of God the Father in sending his Son was
that “Whosoever believeth in him might not perish.” The fact
that Christ came to seek and save the lost makes it clear that
whatever serves to convince the world that men are not already,
and will not continue eternally to be, lost without the obedience
involved in the exercise of faith in Christ, runs counter to the
whole drift of missionary endeavor. The gospel of repentance was
foremost in the preaching of John the Baptist, of Christ and the
Apostles—repentance because “He will thoroughly purge his floor and
gather his wheat into the garner, but he will burn up the chaff
with unquenchable fire.”

However much good may come from missions to civilization,
howsoever much they may add to the comfort, the intelligence,
the personal enjoyment of those who may receive the benefit of
them, nevertheless the grand inspiring motive of missions is to
save lost souls. Those in the closest sympathy with Christ, those
who have consecrated themselves to work for him, feel this most
deeply. There are many who appreciate the excellent example given
us by our Saviour when on earth, many who are actuated by kindly
impulses, who wish well for the happiness of their fellow men here
and hereafter; but if these men fail to realize that Christ’s
mission was to save the lost, and that the lost can be saved only
through the preaching of His cross, they are not, as a rule, deeply
interested in the work of promoting missionary efforts at home or
abroad. They do not manifest in any good degree the actuating power
of any nerve of missions. Help must come, progress must be made,
indeed, the world must be brought to Christ, so far as we can see
from history, or from observation in the present generation, by
those who believe and are ready like Christ himself to do all in
their power to bring a lost world into the fullness and blessedness
of the Redeemer’s kingdom.


[Illustration: THE JOHN BROWN STEAMER.]

       *       *       *       *       *


SECOND NATIONAL EDUCATION ASSEMBLY.

This Assembly, to which reference was made in our July
_Missionary_, was held at Ocean Grove, Aug. 9, 10, 11 and 12, for
the purpose of bringing together prominent persons to awaken public
sentiment in favor of aid for the education of the illiterate
masses in our country.

The meetings were conducted by Rev. J. C. Hartzell, D.D., and the
topics discussed embraced nearly every phase of educational work,
relating more especially, however, to the negroes, the poor whites
and the Indians. In our limited space, we can give simply two or
three leading features of the discussion.

The subject of National Aid to Education deservedly received
large attention and found its way into addresses other than those
on that particular topic. Secretary Strieby presided during the
session when it was considered, and the time was occupied by Prof.
Painter, Hon. J. P. Wickersham, Senator H. W. Blair and others.
Mr. Wickersham gave a comprehensive résumé of the aid provided by
foreign nations for schools, pointing out its benefits and also its
evils. He argued that, although it generally was the wisest and
the only successful way for the people to provide education for
themselves, yet under conditions like those in a portion of our
country, help should be given by the government. True patriotism,
he said, requires us to keep an army of schoolmasters in the South
now as much as it did to maintain an army of soldiers to put down
the rebellion. The urgency of national aid to education at once
was emphasized by Judge Tourgee in the expression that ten million
dollars for this purpose to-day would be worth more than ten
thousand millions twenty years hence. Senator Blair, who recognizes
fully the value of aggressive and thorough methods of reform,
declared, and we think truly, that if every leading newspaper
would give one strong editorial urging the importance of national
aid, if every popular lecturer would devote one hour to public
discussion of the subject, and if every minister would preach one
sermon in its advocacy, the next Congress would pass a bill for
an appropriation for the purpose among its earliest acts, and the
people of the nation would applaud with hearty commendations.

The Negro in America came up for a full share of attention at a
morning session. A goodly number of colored bishops, doctors of
divinity and professors in educational institutions were present.
Their zeal for bringing about reform had been heightened by the
fact, that in so good and moral a community as Ocean Grove,
they were requested to occupy a dining-room by themselves, near
the kitchen, in the house where they were entertained. There
was no color-line drawn, however, at the meeting. Dr. Rust, who
presided, claimed that as the Africans came to this country as
invited guests, that as we even sent our ships for them, they were
entitled to more respect than ordinary foreigners. That respect
was certainly accorded them on this occasion. Dr. Ward, of the
_Independent_, led off with a clear-cut address on the Danger-Line
in Negro Education, setting forth the folly of those who hold that
education unfits men for useful labor. The gist of this topic he
gave in a sentence: “We must educate or we perish.” Rev. J. C.
Price (colored) of North Carolina, urged that the Negro must solve
his problem by his own impressibility. So fitting and eloquent were
his words, that when his limited time had expired, the audience,
with prolonged applause, refused to allow the next speaker to be
called, and it was only when the Chairman assured them that Mr.
Price was but one colored orator among the many he had to bring
forward and announced Bishop Campbell that the speakers were
allowed to proceed. Dr. Tanner, also colored, read a paper on “The
Color-Line,” taking the ground that in this country there must be
no class distinction, but that we must be one people. A new code
of ethics, he said, was proposed, a code not known in any other
nation. It was that equals may associate with equals, if they are
of the same color. The session, which had been participated in by
two white speakers, was brought to a close by Bishop Campbell,
whose good-natured appearance brought freshly to mind the anecdote
that had just been told by Rev. J. W. Hamilton, of Boston, the pith
of which was the reply of the black man, that if the negro had no
soul, religion made his body feel mighty happy.

An evening was given for a public reception of missionaries,
teachers and preachers who have labored in the South from the North
since the war, about 150 of whom were present. Gen. John Eaton
presided over the immense gathering assembled to welcome them.
Pres. Braden, of Nashville, Tenn., Sup’t Salisbury, of the A. M. A.,
Gen. S. C. Armstrong, and others, made addresses.

All the meetings were full of interest, and the managers will
publish a report of the proceedings in pamphlet form.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE little company which met in Albany Sept. 3, 1846, to found
the American Missionary Association, is rapidly passing away.
Another of those original founders, Hon. Freeman Walker, of North
Brookfield, Mass., at the ripe age of seventy-nine entered into
rest July 11, 1883. If less conspicuous than some others, he was
not less clear in his convictions nor less staunch in his defense
of the liberties and rights of his fellow men. He had large
official trusts in town, and State and nation, extending over many
years, and was always the incorruptible citizen, as he was the
humble Christian.

He inherited all the mental keenness, as well as the moral
toughness and tenacity of the Puritan ancestry, in the eighth
generation of which he stood in regular descent. He had hardly
reached his majority before he placed himself in the ranks of the
few who then stood on the side of the slave. His heart and his
hand, his purse and his home were at the service of the fugitive
in the days of slavery, and since the emancipation as fully at the
service of the freedmen.

The Association has had no firmer friend than Mr. Walker, and few,
in the measure of their means, have more liberally contributed to
its treasury. He belonged to a generation of heroes and martyrs—men
of daring courage and of mighty faith. They were honored of God,
and are now coming to receive the homage of mankind.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sixty Years in the Harvest Field_ is the title of a biographical
sketch of Havilah Mowry, Jr., published by A. S. Barnes & Co. The
book contains 360 pages, and is valuable by way of suggestion as
to how laymen may employ their leisure even in the humble walks of
life in bringing sinners to Christ. Mr. Mowry, after working as
a blacksmith for a series of years in Connecticut, entered upon
service as city missionary at Brooklyn, N.Y., where he labored for
many years with marked success. The book is worthy of a place in
Sunday-school libraries, and fitted to promote evangelistic work.

       *       *       *       *       *


A GIFT BY A BOHEMIAN BOY.

We publish below a letter from Dr. Alden, Secretary of the American
Board, to District Secretary Woodworth, of Boston.

It is a touching fact that a boy in that far-off land should
remember the black children of our own country. It shows how
strangely the impulse of Christian sympathy strikes from land to
land, and suggests the propriety of making this humble gift of
the utmost value to him that gives and those who receive. We,
therefore, propose, as a simple method of reaching that object,
that any person or Sunday-school sending us $10 for the purpose
shall receive one of these pieces of money. The donors to this
object will receive the pieces in the order of application. If more
gifts than the ten are forwarded, we will return them to the donors
or appropriate them by permission to the colored children of the
South.

“REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D.—_My dear brother_: I take great
pleasure in committing to your trust the inclosed pieces of money,
ten pieces in all, each of them the value of ten kreutzers, making
100 kreutzers in all, or probably about half a dollar of our
currency. It is the gift of a boy in Prague, Austria, whose name
is Bohumil Burda. The name ‘Bohumil’ is the same in signification
as the ordinary name Theophilus, that is to say, ‘a friend of
God.’ This boy placed the money in my hands when Dr. Clark and I
were at Prague, saying that he wished it to be given to the ‘black
children of America.’ I give you the exact coins which he had laid
up after the self-sacrifices of several months, in his warm spirit
of Christian benevolence, and I commit them to you as a sacred
trust, assured that you will know how to multiply them, and how to
use them in such a way as will be not only for the interest of the
black children of America, but for the awakening of their interest
in the needy and the promising children of Bohemia.

“With best wishes for the success of the Society which you now
represent, I remain yours most fraternally,

                            “E. K. ALDEN, Sec. A. B. C. F. M.”

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

Henry L. Kendall, of Providence, has bequeathed $1,500 to the
Hampton Institute.

Dr. Eliphalet Clark has left a bequest of $50,000 to the Kent’s
Hill Methodist Seminary in Maine.

An unknown contributor, of Massachusetts, has given $5,000 to
Williams College to establish a physical gymnasium.

Charles L. Colby has given $1,000,000 to establish a new university
in Wisconsin. It was his father, Gardner Colby, who endowed the
college which bears his name in Waterville, Me.

The large liberality of Dr. Lucien C. Warner, of New York, will
provide a building three stories high, and 150 feet by 120, for
the Conservatory of Music at Oberlin. It is expected to cost from
$30,000 to $50,000.

Mr. and Mrs. Mills have just added $20,000 to their gifts to Mills
Seminary, Oakland, Cal., and fifteen acres of land. Another gift of
$5,000 has also been received, and one of $2,000 from Mrs. Wm. E.
Dodge.

The trustees of the estate of the late Frederick Marquand have
given a subscription to the Elmira Female College of $25,000, on
condition that an equal sum be raised by the friends of the college.

The Canadian government has appropriated $44,000 for the
establishment of Indian schools in the Northwest. Two schools are
to be built with this money—one Protestant and one Catholic.

Mr. Moody has recently received from a gentleman in Boston a gift
of $50,000 for his school at Northfield, on condition that an
additional $50,000 be raised. Several scholarships of $3,000 each
have also been received lately.

_The demand for a new building at the Tillotson Institute, Austin,
Texas, of which mention was made in our December_ MISSIONARY, _is
very urgent. Last year the number of students turned away for lack
of room was greater than the number admitted. Twenty thousand
dollars, in addition to the amount already pledged for the purpose,
are needed at once._

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


THE INDIANS.

—W. H. McKinney, a Choctaw from the Indian Territory, graduated
this year from Roanoke College, receiving the degree of B.A.

—Thirty Nez Perces women, widows of the men who fled from Idaho in
1876, have been permitted to leave the Indian Territory and return
to their old homes.

—The Department at Washington has entered into an agreement with
the managers of the Lincoln Institute, Philadelphia, whereby that
institution is to undertake the education of fifty Indian girls.

—Bishop Whipple, when on a recent visit to the Indian department of
the missionary diocese, administered the communion to 247 Chippewa
Indians. There are eight churches in the Chippewa mission. One just
building will cost $10,000.

—Three hundred acres of land have been purchased, south of
Lawrence, Kansas, for the site of an Indian Industrial School,
located by the last session of Congress. Suitable buildings will be
erected for the accommodation of 500 pupils. Ten thousand dollars
have been raised for the object by private subscription, and it
will probably be completed by November 1.

—Information is published in Nebraska to the effect that the
tradition that Indians will not work is untrue. On the line of the
Minneapolis & Omaha Railroad they hang around the section houses
and insist on being hired whenever any extra work is to be done,
and every regular gang has both Winnebagoes and Omahas in it. They
make efficient laborers, often giving better satisfaction than
foreigners in the employ of the company.


THE CHINESE.

—The revival power is being manifested to a greater extent in Japan
than elsewhere.

—A union for Christian work among the Chinese of Brooklyn, N.Y.,
has been formed, with Andrew A. Smith, Secretary of the Park
Commission, at its head. A reading-room and headquarters will be
established at 991 and 993 Fulton street.

—There are now more than 300 Chinese Christians on the Hawaiian
Islands, and stated religious services for them are maintained
at four different points. One of these Celestials, a member and
a deacon of the Church in Honolulu, has built a school-house in
his native village in China, and now supports a Christian teacher
there, thus showing the importance of evangelistic work among the
Chinese of these Islands.

—European statisticians are gradually reducing their estimates of
the population of China. It used to be put at over 400,000,000.
Behm and Wagner reduce their estimate for China and Corea from
434,500,000 to 379,500,000. Peterson reduces his estimate by
75,000,000, making the present total 350,000,000. Dr. Happer,
missionary, believes this can safely be reduced another 50,000,000.
Mr. Hippisley, Acting Commissioner of Customs, thinks 250,000,000
more nearly correct than 350,000,000. The losses by the Taeping and
Mohammedan rebellions, and by the famine and pestilence which swept
the provinces of Chili, Shantung, Shansi, Shensi and Houan, are
variously estimated at from 61,000,000 to 81,000,000.


AFRICA.

—King Mtesa, of Uganda, is dead. He welcomed and co-operated with
Capt. Speke, the discoverer of Victoria Nyanza, and has played a
prominent part in all the events that have occurred in his kingdom,
whether they were in the interest of exploration or mission work.

—The German Reichstag is said to have voted 1,000,000 marks, about
£50,000, for the expense of a German exploring expedition into
Central Africa.

—Mr. H. M. Stanley is said to have used more than a million yards
of Manchester goods in paying the workmen employed in constructing
the road to Stanley Pool.

—Drs. Bachmann and Wilms, of Munster, set out in May for a journey
of several years in Africa, especially in the Transvaal, which they
contemplate exploring with reference to botany and zoölogy. They
hope also to develop commercial relations between Southern Africa
and Germany.

—Since the overthrow of Arabi Pasha, the missions of the United
Presbyterians of America have been more prosperous than ever.
Their work, which is largely among the Copts, is approved by the
Coptic Bishop, and one of the young men recently licensed by the
mission has been engaged to expound the Scriptures. So great was
the interest in his first sermon that he was obliged to repeat it
three times. Women disguised themselves in male attire in order to
get into the streets to hear the preaching. An effort will be made
to establish a regular national evangelical church in Egypt.

—From reliable statistics it appears that the progress of Islamism
in Africa, during the last hundred years, has been appalling. At
the Mohammedan Missionary University, at Cairo, in Egypt, there
are at this day 10,000 students under training, ready to go to any
part of the world to teach the doctrines of Islam. Missionaries
meet these Moslem priests not in Turkey alone, which is the centre
of their power, but also in Persia, India and China, and in the
heart of Africa. Very few have been led to renounce their faith for
Christianity. This is owing to the fear of persecution, for the
Moslem holds that it is not only proper, but a duty to kill any one
who abjures his faith in their prophet.

[Illustration: VICTORIA FALLS, ZAMBESE RIVER, AFRICA.]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE COLOR-LINE.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Opinions Gathered from the Press._

CASTE PREJUDICE.

REV. W. H. WARD, D.D.—ADDRESS AT CLEVELAND.

Christianity in India has utterly succumbed to caste once. The
missionaries of the last century, after beginning nobly, yielded
and allowed caste to rule in the Christian church. “I have
carefully avoided all coercive measures,” said Schwarz, in 1787.
Bishop Heber allowed caste. Not till 1833 did the English Church
missionaries decide, through the voice of the noble Bishop Wilson,
in a peremptory pastorate letter of July 5, 1833, that no mercy
should be shown to the accursed thing. “The distinctions of caste,”
said he, “must be abandoned decidedly, immediately, finally.
Birth condemns no class of men, from generation to generation, to
inevitable contempt, debasement and servitude. The enforcement of
this order broke up churches. A Sudra would sooner give up his
Christianity than take the communion with a pariah. The war has
been long, and is not yet fully concluded. An American Lutheran
missionary lately felicitated himself that now the two castes have
been prevailed upon to take the Lord’s Supper together. In a London
missionary station some ten years ago a few pariahs were converted,
whereupon the Shanars, at their own cost, built a chapel for their
low caste brethren, lest they should have to worship with them. A
few years ago a missionary led several low caste Christians into a
chapel door, whereupon the high caste occupants hastily scrambled
out of the window. * * *

Do I say that caste is broken down? Not quite. Even yet it lingers:
and where it lingers chiefest is, it shames me to say, in education
and Christianity. To the infinite disgrace of the church, the chief
denominations of the South divide on the caste line. The white
Christians and churches are put purposely into one denomination,
and the colored into another. We have white Methodists and
black Methodists; white Baptist associations and black Baptist
associations. What denomination is there but the Roman Catholic,
the Episcopalian and the Congregational, in which whites and blacks
can stand equally before God? In the South both whites and blacks
accept this condition, for the most part, as right. It does not
occur to them to protest against it. Even the negroes accept the
humiliation to which they have become accustomed. No voice of
protest is raised. Whites and blacks alike seem satisfied that
God’s church united above should be divided below. Why lingers
Jerubbaal amid the wheat-threshings of Manasseh? Why comes no
Gideon forth, inspired with the zeal of the Lord, to cut down this
horrible idol of his father’s house? * * * *

When the colored race were slaves, the color marked the social
distinction of service. That is all past now. They may be servants
still. Then the social distinction still holds. We cannot break up
these right social distinctions. We cannot prevent the existence
of classes in society. We choose those of our own sort, with whom
we are intimate. But in the name of God, in the name of the hopes
and rights of the poor, in the memory of the accursed experience
of the ages of serfdom, in the East and in the West, we demand
that neither law nor recognized custom shall impose on social
conditions the Satanic burdens, the hopeless, crushing weight
of impassable caste. It is accursed in the hall of legislation,
accursed at the ballot-box, accursed in the court-room, accursed in
the church-pews, accursed at the Lord’s table—most accursed when it
sets an impassable gulf between high and low, white and black in
the school-room.

       *       *       *       *       *


A QUESTION OF CASTE.

BY REV. HORACE BUMSTEAD, D.D.

It should be remembered that this prejudice in the South is more
one of caste than it is one of race. It is in the former relation
of master and slave that the distinction between the races has its
strongest roots. The personal antipathy on the ground of feature
and color—the race prejudice pure and simple—is not so great in the
South as at the North, where fewer colored people are met with. I
have heard a Congregational pastor, in one of the most enlightened
communities of Massachusetts, declare that he did not think he
could endure the presence of a colored cook in his kitchen. One
of the best Northern teachers in the South confesses that when
he first met with colored people in the horse-cars of Washington
he would sit as far from them as possible. But Southern men and
women who were nursed at the breasts of slave mammies in infancy,
have played familiarly with colored children in childhood, and
have been served all their lives by the darker-skinned race in a
multitude of ways and in the closest personal proximity, can feel
little, if any, of this personal antipathy. It is the distinction
between a serving class and a ruling class which chiefly causes the
separation here. But as the colored people acquire intelligence and
property, and the white people learn more of the dignity of labor,
this distinction will cease to coincide with the color line.

But it is said that white students will not _now_ attend school
with the colored, and that we must take the facts as they are.
But the facts are not all on one side. For years the students of
Berea College, in Kentucky, have been about equally divided between
the two races, and have studied harmoniously together. And why?
Simply because, for a large surrounding region, Berea College has
offered the best and cheapest opportunity for an education. Let
all the institutions of the American Missionary Association be
amply endowed and equipped, so that they can offer to the poor
whites more and better than can be obtained anywhere else, and the
wasteful and needless expedient of missionary color-line schools
and colleges will no longer be thought of.

                                      _The Congregationalist._


NOT ON ACCOUNT OF COLOR.

EDITORIAL IN INDEPENDENT.

Professor James M. Gregory, of the Howard University, made some
capital remarks on the “color line” at the recent banquet in
Washington, in honor of Frederick Douglass. “The color line,” as
he justly said, “was drawn when the Negro was made a slave in this
country,” and the prejudice existing against him is “not on account
of color, but by reason of previous condition, his color serving
to indicate his identity with a race held as bondmen.” “This
prejudice,” he added, “is purely American. Colored men traveling in
other countries have not found _color_ a mark of degradation. If
they are reminded of their color at all, it is by Americans they
meet, who are not magnanimous enough to treat the negro courteously
even on foreign soil, where race prejudice is not tolerated.” * * *

Let the practice of the American people be as impartially just as
is their Constitution; and our colored fellow-citizens will have no
grievances of which to complain. We congratulate them upon the fact
that the Constitution has taken them under its charge, and upon the
further fact that the day-star of a bright and promising future is
gradually shedding its light upon their horizon. The doctrine of
equal privileges and equal responsibilities will in the end lift
them to the level of an unquestioned and developed manhood; and
then the “color line” will wholly disappear.


ONLY HALF TRUE.

A friend, who is familiar with the blacks at the South, writes
us that the statement that “the colored people prefer to be in
churches by themselves” is only half true. He adds that, so far as
it is true, it is because they either shrink from the restraints
of a pure and intelligent religion, such as that of the whites,
or from the scorn or ill-concealed toleration of their white
fellow-worshipers; and that, if sure of a cordial welcome by the
whites, they do not prefer to worship by themselves. We are glad to
give publicity to this statement, although it is contradicted by
that of every one else whom we remember to have heard speak of the
matter. Is there not another reason which tends to separate white
and black Christians into distinct churches? Do not the latter,
even when assured of a cordial welcome by the whites, usually
prefer an emotional, hortatory style of preaching which is very
dear to them, but which disturbs, if it do not even amuse, the
whites? Certainly it is so here at the North.

                                      _The Congregationalist._


ONE DESTINY.

BY FREDERICK DOUGLASS.

There is but one destiny, it seems to me, left for us, and that
is to make ourselves and be made by others a part of the American
people in every sense of the word. Assimilation, not isolation, is
our true policy and natural destiny. Unification for us is life.
Separation is death. We cannot afford to set up for ourselves a
separate political party or adopt for ourselves a political creed
apart from the rest of our fellow-citizens.

                                            _The Independent._


CHRIST OR CASTE.

BY H. K. CARROLL.

Shall we go into the South to exalt Christ or to surrender to
caste? Shall we go to the Negro as to a being made a little lower
than man, and reach down to him, not to lift him up to our plane,
but to help him live better and be content on his own lower
plane? Or, shall we go to him as to a brother of our own blood,
unfortunate, degraded, despised, and strive thus to save him and
improve him on Christ’s plan? If we go for Christ, we go inevitably
to bear reproach, to submit to ostracism; we go to contend against
untold difficulties, to meet with discouragements, to fail, it may
be, for many years, of at least great numerical success. * * * The
secret of much wrong thinking and wrong practice concerning mixed
churches is the idea which both Dr. Curry and Dr. Wheeler seem to
regard as universal, that the Church is a social institution. If
this be once admitted, Dr. Wheeler is right in contending that the
lines of social distinction which are drawn in the drawing-room
will inevitably be drawn in the Church. Here is a basis quite
sufficient to build white and colored churches upon; but it is
just as certainly broad enough for other social distinctions,
which Methodism, of all branches of the Church Catholic, has been
the least willing to admit. Seeing, as Dr. Wheeler sees, that the
employer and the laborer, the rich and the poor, the learned and
the unlearned form different and more or less distinct classes
in society, we cannot only justify churches organized on the
color line, but we must be prepared to justify churches organized
exclusively for the rich; churches for the poor; churches for the
educated and churches for the uneducated; churches for merchants
and distinct churches for clerks. The idea that the Church is a
social institution, if rigidly adhered to, would give us a system
of class distinctions as intricate as that of India. There are
two great facts which make the whole human race absolutely equal,
absolutely without distinctive claims or advantages, before the
altar. The first is the fact of universal sin; the second is the
fact of universal need of salvation. Men of all degrees, from the
prince to the peasant, from the millionaire to the pauper, from
the most profound scholar to the most unlettered backwoodsman,
from the whitest European to the blackest African, meet in church
on a common platform. They leave their social distinctions, their
rank, and their peculiar privileges outside the church door. Here
is the one place where all the sons of God may meet and work
together as one family. The Duke of Wellington knelt at the altar
with a plain farmer and received the sacrament. “Here,” said he,
“we are brothers.” The Church is associational rather than social.
It exists in society, is formed from society, and exercises the
most powerful influence on society; but its province is neither to
break down nor build up distinctions in society. It may inculcate
principles, which men and women will carry into their social
relations, for the cure of such evils as may exist in society; but
it is not its province as an organization to form and regulate
society. Its distinct work is to draw all men to Christ and help
them to live a righteous and useful life.

                                            _The Independent._


THE CHRISTIAN LEAGUE.

BY REV. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D.

“This company must be a clean one, and there is no lack of sound
and reputable men in our churches.”

“How about the colored brethren?” queried Mr. Strong.

“The colored brethren must be left out,” was the answer, “not for
social, but for ecclesiastical reasons. One of the first duties
of this league of ours, if it ever gets into operation, will be
the suppression of these colored churches. When the colored people
abandon their own organizations, and join the other churches,
they may come in as representatives from them. We will have no
color-line in the Christianity for which this club stands. I’ll go
as far as any other man in fraternizing with colored men; but with
colored churches, never. The sectarianism whose only basis is the
color of the skin is the meanest kind of sectarianism.”

                                                _The Century._


IT DECIDES NOTHING.

BY REV. D. M. WILSON.

We are told that the colored prefer to be by themselves. Were
this true, it would decide nothing as to the proper method of
church work. The several castes of India would have preferred to
remain separate even after nominally embracing Christianity; but
this could not be. Among Christians there is but one fold and one
Shepherd. The very object of religion is to make men one in Christ
and one in Christian fellowship. If this be not done, nothing
is done to any good purpose. Our separate schools and separate
churches have during the last eighteen years done more to separate
and alienate the two races than two hundred and forty years of
slavery had done. In the times of slavery both races were in the
same churches. Why not now? One thing is too plain for an honest
man to deny, and that is the fact that, had the whites treated
the colored during these last years with the same courtesy that
they extend to a Roman Catholic Irishman and his children, we
would never have heard of a colored school or that ecclesiastical
monstrosity, a _colored church_. The results are disastrous to both
parties. The colored are left to themselves and the blind lead the
blind. Nine-tenths of their preachers have no more fitness for
preaching than they have for lecturing upon fluxions. Were one of
their churches of average capacity for senseless noise and uproar
within earshot of my residence, I would regard it a number one
nuisance. But it is _not_ their fault that they are by themselves.
A brute only moderately domesticated soon understands when he is
not welcome, and acts accordingly. When slavery had disappeared,
the colored saw but too plainly that they were _not_ welcome any
longer in their old churches, and they went forth into a darkness
deeper than they had before know.

                                            _The Independent._


MORE AT HOME BY THEMSELVES.

REV. JAS. H. FAIRCHILD, D.D.

The colored church came into existence not because the colored
people were not welcomed to all the other churches, nor because
a separate organization was desired by those who had been most
favored with education and culture, but because considerable
numbers of them felt more at home with a style of service and
instruction more like that with which they had been familiar.

                        _Oberlin, the Colony and the College._


WHITE AND COLORED CHURCHES.

BY C. L. GOODELL, D.D.

Having lived over ten years in a Southern State and been an
interested observer of colored people and a sympathetic helper
wherever I could be, I feel a deep interest in the settlement of
this question concerning the mixing of the races in the churches.

Whenever there is a call for a church of Christ, let the brethren
come together and organize it, and start it off with all the
wisdom given them, as to location and other practical matters. It
is a little republic ordering its own affairs, with whatever fact
and counsel it may seek from sister churches. If it be a colored
church, let it take in whatever white Christians may come to its
door, in case it would take in a colored Christian applying under
similar circumstances and of the same Christian character and
fitness. Not many white Christians will come; some might, owing to
their peculiar relations to the church, or to the neighborhood, and
so on.

If a white church be organized, let it receive whatever colored
Christians may knock at its door, in case it would receive white
Christians applying under similar circumstances and of the same
Christian character and fitness. Let that be the rule. There are
always individual cases which must be settled each by itself. Not
many colored people will come; some might, owing to their special
relations to the church or some member of it, and so on. This law
is fundamental in God’s order of society. It applies to Chinamen
and Indians and all races in our communities. Take them as they
come. Not many will come. They prefer to be together; and it is
better they should be as a general thing. * * * Colored Christians
ought to have free access and welcome to white churches. As soon as
they find out that they are really loved and esteemed, and can come
into white churches as brethren, they cease to desire it. They are
happy and helped by this knowledge; but they would rather worship
together, just as every other race would. They love to exchange
fraternal salutations and have many interests in common; but in the
regular work and worship of church life they choose to be one of
the distinct branches of the great body of whom Christ is the head.
I know this from years of practical experience.

                                            _The Independent._


THE COLOR LINE IN CHURCHES.

There is no place in the country where the question of the color
line can be so easily and so fairly tried as in Washington. Here
is a population of 60,000 colored people, with sixty-five colored
churches. There are also in the District 124 white churches,
nearly or quite all of them having one or two colored members,
generally the sexton and his wife. But every colored adult in
Washington knows that the Congregational Church is the only one in
which he stands on an equal footing with his white brethren and
sisters, as their great leader, Frederick Douglass, told them,
“only one church in the national capital over whose doors is the
beautiful inscription, ‘Freedom to worship God without distinction
of color.’” And the pastor of that church, Dr. Rankin, is as much
beloved and as much trusted by the colored population of this city
as a man can be. And the leaders of the colored people all come
here. Hon. J. M. Langston, United States Minister to Hayti, Hon.
B. K. Bruce, ex-senator and now Registrar of the Treasury, the
professors of Howard University and a few others come; and yet I
doubt if there are two dozen colored members in this church. There
are two colored Congregational churches in Washington without a
white man in them, and to them all the colored Congregationalists
go. Nor is it to be wondered at. To the great majority of them the
preaching would be over their heads. Their education and position
in life deprive them of meeting their white brethren on an equality
in parish or prayer meeting. They naturally go by themselves, not
that they are forced to, but because they prefer it. The emotional
demands of their nature are not met in the cooler atmosphere of the
white man’s religion. And so it must be throughout the South. Each
race will for the present prefer churches of its own color. If two
churches are formed in one place at the same time the whites would
not care to sit under the imperfect education and narrow compass of
thought of the colored preacher, nor would the darker portion of
the audience enjoy the more cultivated sermons or prayers of the
whites. Until the average education of the black is more advanced
let them keep separate. The mixing of the races is sure to come,
but it will require generations to do it. All the present can do is
to offer them open doors. If they decline to enter it is their own
action. But with growing wealth, with education equal to that of
their white neighbors, will come social intercourse, and not till
then.

                              _W. R. H. in Congregationalist._


RESOLUTIONS OF A. M. A. AND A. H. M. S.

At the recent annual meeting of the American Missionary
Association, held in Cleveland, O., a petition was presented
requesting the appointment of a committee to report on the policy
of the Association in regard to race or color prejudice in the
support of schools and churches. As the Executive Committee, to
whom that petition was referred, are entering upon enlarged church
work in the South, they feel called upon to take early action on
this petition, and make the following announcement:

1. That in accordance with the New Testament doctrine upon which
the Association was founded, and by which it has from the beginning
been governed, that God has made of one blood all the nations of
men, we reiterate the rule, which we believe that fidelity to
Christ requires, that all our churches and schools shall open their
doors impartially to persons of every class, race and color.

2. That in obedience to the same New Testament doctrine, we shall
require that all churches aided by us shall unite with neighboring
churches of the same faith and order in Christian fellowship in
the same conferences or associations, and in church councils,
and in other usual means of fraternity and fellowship, making no
distinctions on account of race or color.

3. That this Association will not enter upon any new church work
in any city or town where the American Home Missionary Society has
already established a church work, without previous conference with
the officers of its sister society.

       *       *       *       *       *

The American Home Missionary Society is taking steps to enlarge
its work in the Southern States. Recent statements and inquiries
having been made which show a misapprehension, on the part of
some, of the methods of its work in that part of the country, the
Executive Committee deem it proper to state: That the American Home
Missionary Society still adheres to its long-established usage
in declining to aid in the support of a missionary to serve any
church, whether in the South or North, which refuses to receive
to its membership any applicant, solely on account of color.
That it still expects, as it has from the beginning, that any
church, wherever situated, that receives its aid in supporting a
minister, will unite with the association, convention, or other
ecclesiastical body of the denomination within whose bounds he is
appointed to labor; and by participating in councils, conferences
and other customary gatherings for mutual help and edification,
will show its Christian fellowship with other Congregational
churches. And that, in case of proposals to form or aid churches
in cities or towns where the American Missionary Association has
organized missionary operations, this society will not enter on
such work without first corresponding or conferring with its sister
association.


A MISTAKEN POLICY.

BY REV. W. HAYNE LEAVELL.

This is my deliberate conviction, based upon such knowledge of the
Southern People as comes from the fact of having been born and
bred among them, and from my observation among the more cultivated
families that go there from this region.

You will permit me to say, therefore, that in my judgment the
proposed policy of our societies is a mistaken one. Most of the
reasons that influence our brethren who guide the policies of these
missionary organizations I have considered, and largely sympathize
with their spirit; and if the plan were practicable, I would see no
Christian reason why it should not be carried out. But if we desire
to secure a foothold for Congregationalism among the respectable
white people of the South, and enlarge our borders in that
direction, we must adopt the only policy that will gain this end,
and have churches composed predominantly, if not exclusively, of
white people, as well as churches composed mainly of black people
for the blacks.

We may argue against caste in the churches of Jesus Christ, and
resolve that we will not be a party to its perpetuation anywhere
under the sun. Very well, then we must not hope for a successful
propagation of our denominational principles among the ruling
classes of the South, for they will not enter into church relations
with the colored people. After the churches are separately
organized, and while they are separately maintained, they will
affiliate in associations and conventions, but the limit will be
drawn at the line of the church. However unrighteous, this is a
stubborn fact—and anybody who has good knowledge of the Southern
character will know that it is to remain as stubborn for all time
to come.

Mixed churches among us, where colored people are comparatively
few, and in the South, where colored people are so numerous, are
very different things. For among us the predominant element in the
churches will remain predominant, and it is an easy matter for 500
white Christians to associate with five of another race and color.
But for 250 white Christians to associate in churches on equal
terms with 250 “colored” Christians is another, and by no means a
comfortable thing. Before the war, negroes and their masters were
in the same churches and enjoyed the association, but the negroes
sat in the galleries, and in other ways were not put upon an
equality.


WHO SHALL WORK SOUTH?—THE QUESTION STATED.

BY REV. L. W. BACON, D.D.

A gravely important and difficult question as to the future
policy of the Society (A. H. M. S.) was submitted in behalf of
the executive. It was one technically within the competency of
the executive to decide, but too important to be so decided,
without larger counsel: Shall the Society’s system of operations
with missions and superintendencies be extended over the Southern
States? In favor of this measure are urged (1) the desire to make
the field of the Society’s work co-extensive with the nation; (2)
the duty we owe to white people, as well as black, at the South;
(3) the alleged demand for the Society’s aid to communities of
Congregationalists who have moved to the South. Against it are (1)
the measureless inadequacy of the Society’s present or probable
resources for the urgent instant demands of its present field;
(2) the wastefulness of organizing and supporting a second system
of superintendencies over the field already occupied by the
superintendencies of the American Missionary Association, and the
chances of friction or collision between the two systems; (3) the
impossibility of drawing any line of demarkation between the two
systems of missions on the same ground, except a color line: the
emphasizing of the color line, in the most obtrusive and offensive
manner, not only by two orders of missionaries, one to whites
and one to blacks, but by two orders of mission churches, one
for black people in which whites shall be tolerated, and one for
white people where blacks shall be tolerated with not so much as
a common superintendency to co-ordinate them; and thus the danger
of indelibly fixing the color line, fortifying it by new vested
interests, and defeating any kindly tendency toward the effacing of
it from the Christian Church. Such considerations as these led the
congregation (we can hardly say the Society), after deliberation
and debate, and especially after the very able speech of Mr.
Blakeslee, to decline committing itself to this great and not
easily revocable step, and to leave it for a year’s consideration,
and though a later and less considerate vote was obtained in a form
which seemed to throw doubt upon this decision, nevertheless the
reluctance toward the new policy was of such a weight and character
that a prudent executive may be trusted to keep it in view and move
with caution, in a matter that does not press for instant action.

                                                _The Advance._


A QUESTIONABLE PROCEDURE.

BY REV. HORACE BUMSTEAD, D.D.

The American Missionary Association and the Am. Home Missionary
Society have both announced their purpose to enter upon enlarged
church work in the South. Is it not questionable whether it is best
for the Home Missionary Society to enter the Southern field at all?
Does that Society propose to do the same broad work for all races
and classes which the A. M. A. aims to do, and in good measure has
done? If so, why duplicate missionary machinery for this region? Or
is it proposing to do a work less broad, and if so, are its friends
ready to support it in so doing?

                                      _The Congregationalist._


THE OHIO IDEA.

RESOLUTION OF CONGREGATIONAL CONFERENCE AT AKRON.

WHEREAS, During the past twenty years the work of the
Congregational churches for the needy millions of the South has
been performed in a manner that is fast winning the respect and
sympathy of all classes; first, by its being based upon Christian
needs without too evident attention being paid to denominational
advantages; second, by its uncompromising fidelity to Christian
principles in respect to the spirit of caste;

_Resolved_, That we, the members of the Congregational Association
of Ohio, do earnestly deprecate the adoption of any permanent
policy by which Congregational churches shall be established in the
South, practically, though not professedly, on the basis of what
is called the “color line;” and that in our judgment two distinct
Congregational Societies, the one working mainly for the white and
the other for the black race, in the same field, will inevitably
tend to perpetuate race prejudice, set at variance Congregational
brethren themselves, and so defeat the end of true religion.


WHAT IS A COLOR-LINE CHURCH?

BY PROF. C. G. FAIRCHILD.

The State Conference of Ohio recently protested against the
establishment by Northern missionary funds of churches based
“practically, though not professedly, upon the ‘color line.’” What
is a color-line church? A church at the North composed largely or
exclusively of colored members, following naturally a race line
of cleavage, as do the Irish or German, is not in this sense a
color-line church. Most white churches at the North have only white
members; but probably there is not one of them but would receive
a colored member without hesitating in the slightest about his
color. These are not color-line churches. There are many important
white churches at the South that have had for many years colored
members; but the colored members must wait for the communion until
the whites are served, and must occupy special seats. Such churches
are color-line churches. Churches at the South composed of blacks,
with a few white teachers and their friends, who would welcome
with tears of gratitude any Southern white families who would show
their love and sympathy by identifying themselves with them are not
color-line churches. A church at the South, composed of whites, in
the midst of a large colored population, or in close contiguity
with a church of kindred organization and sources of support, and
where the advent of the first colored member would be deprecated,
not welcomed, is a church based practically, though it may not be
professedly, upon the color-line. * * * * *

It is always wise to consider facts. The first fact is that this
color distinction is the most potent factor, politically, socially
and religiously, in Southern society. This should dominate every
plan for Christian effort at the South as much as the existence of
the rebel army dominated plans for the “On to Richmond” during the
war.

In the ultimate solution of Southern problems, natural race lines
of cleavage may largely prevail; but it lies within the realms of
reasonable expectancy, and not fancy, to believe that the time
will come when color will not be thought of in the admission of a
person to any hotel, railway car, school, or church. We have no
right yet to let go of this Christian and patriotic hope; but for
the present at the South color places upon a man a more damning and
ineffaceable stain than does murder or political treason, and the
present establishment of white churches as above described would
seem to be an obeisance to this most potent and evil influence.

                                            _The Independent._


THE TENDENCY IS TO RELAX.

EDITORIAL IN INDEPENDENT.

The natural bent of Southern whites is to separation from colored
members, and white congregations willing to open their doors to
all alike will not spring up in great numbers. The tendency, the
temptation is to relax a little on the principle, under trying
circumstances, for the sake of immediate results. We have pointed
out how signally some of the Friends’ schools in the South have
failed to keep their first principles intact. The same lowering
influence has been at work among the Northern Methodists. It is
worth a generation of endeavor, and perhaps it will require it, to
establish an influential constituency on the solid basis of true
Christian Brotherhood.


THE SOUTHEAST.

SEC. BARROWS’ REPORT AT SARATOGA.

How soon shall the Society have a superintendent in this region?
_It is for you to decide._ The executive officers are convinced
that the time has already come for this forward movement.
During the past winter we have had a general missionary at work
in Florida, with encouraging results. At our next anniversary
there will doubtless be present a representative from the Florida
Association of Congregational Churches. The Society also has
missionaries in Maryland, West Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee and
Georgia—and appeals are constantly received urging us to enlarge
this work.

It is not the purpose of this society to foster the spirit of
caste. It was to remove all suspicions on this score that a
friendly conference was lately had with our brethren of the
American Missionary Association, and with the results of that
conference you are all familiar. It is our idea to form churches at
the South, like Dr. Rankin’s in Washington, and Dr. Goodell’s in
St. Louis, churches open to the colored people and to which they
will be made welcome if they see fit to join. The only difficulty
will be to find enough colored people willing to join to save the
principle—the uniform experience hitherto having been that they
prefer to be in churches of their own.

But we have too long ignored the fact that there are several
millions of poor whites at the South who need our help, and must
have it if they are to be fitted for citizenship on earth or in
heaven. They have claims upon our Christian sympathy equal to those
of the colored people, for they too are the victims of slavery, and
are despised by the old slaveholding aristocracy—and even by the
negroes. A Southern man said in our hearing a few days ago, “There
are as many white people at the South who need your help as there
are colored people, and they must be reached by similar means,
viz.: the Christian school and the Christian church.”

Let us now ask the question—Have we been doing our duty by these
people? We know we have not. God forgive us for having neglected
them so long, and may we now show by our actions that our
repentance is genuine! Do you wish the Home Missionary Society to
organize an agency to do this work?


REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON DR. BARROWS’ PAPER.

But why ask the Home Missionary Society to plant these churches and
commission these missionaries? Simply because the endeavor is one
which no present organized agency can successfully accomplish.

The work of the American Missionary Association is noble, and its
field is wide. But broad as are its principles it cannot, as a
practical matter of fact, cultivate the whole of that needy part
of our Lord’s vineyard. That which has been the pride and the
_strength_ of the American Missionary Association, the thing it
has printed on its publications and blazoned on its banners, that
it was organized for the help of the despised races of America, to
some extent honorably incapacitates it for some of the work which,
nevertheless, needs to be done. Not in this generation, nor in
the next, can men and women, between whom not history and habit
only, but nature and providence, run lines so deep as between the
races of the South, be made to any considerable extent to blend in
comfortable and harmonious church relationship.

The ignoring of this fact will cost limitless labor and limitless
disappointment. Why not take up the case as we find it, and
in those places where the hand of invitation now so obviously
beckons, respond to the call? What need of trespass, what occasion
for misunderstanding, if the Home Missionary Society and the
Association thus at some points work side by side?

                                        _The Home Missionary._


DR. WALKER’S ADDRESS.

There is no man in this house who has, to the limit of his ability,
done more cordial and earnest work for the American Missionary
Association than I have. There is no man who maintains a more
cordial relationship with the secretaries and officers of that
society than I do. Personally, each one of them is my friend.
But I do feel, Christian friends, that we have here a question
that we must meet; and the best way to meet it is in the spirit
of frankness and openness, giving it the deliberation which
it requires. The American Missionary Association, as has been
suggested in the paper which has been presented to you, is, in my
view, handicapped for doing a part of the work which is necessary
to be done. * * *

Now the question is: Is it not expedient for us to enter upon that
work? I am met by the objection: “Why, you are doing the same work
that the American Missionary Association is doing. Why have two
societies, side by side, doing essentially the same work?” They are
not doing the same work, in the fact that the subjects for which
they labor are providentially made distinct. It is impossible in
this generation, and in the generation to come, for the American
Missionary Association to plant Congregational churches to any
considerable extent through the South. Now, the plain and practical
question is: Is it wise for us to neglect the present opportunity
and, for the sake of what may be proved after all to be but
sentiment, let the present moment pass, a moment so freighted
with consequences to the future? Is it wise for us to insist upon
the strength of ecclesiastical ties as sufficient to hold men
together, whom we cannot counsel to come together by strength of
natural ties? We cannot advise marriage among the races; why insist
upon a kind of work that forces them together in ecclesiastical
relationships to which they are equally unfamiliar and averse?

                                        _The Home Missionary._


NO CLASHING MUST BE ALLOWED.

EDITORIAL IN ADVANCE.

What the American Missionary Association has done, and is doing,
is only the prophecy of what it is to do in the near future, if it
is promptly sustained in its noble work. And while we are on this
subject, we wish most emphatically to say:

There is not to be, there _must_ not be, any clashing in the work
between this society and the American Home Missionary Society.

The American Missionary Association was organized for a specific
work, broadly and definitely understood to be for the uplifting
of the colored races on this continent. To that work they are
pledged, for that money is given to them, and they are very wisely
administering the trust committed to their hands. To criticise
that society because it does not organize what are known as white
churches is the height of folly, and for it to attempt to force
mixed churches on the South would be equally absurd. The American
Home Missionary Society should not go down South with the idea of
starting white churches. It should be allowed, and must be allowed,
to go there and organize churches just as it does in Iowa, Dakota,
Missouri and Kansas, saying nothing at all about the race question
or in any way excluding colored people from its membership; giving
them that freedom which is theirs, to come in, and the freedom also
to stay out, and to have their own churches, and their own social
circles, just as they please. Any one who undertakes to force
such things out of their natural and proper course will only work
confusion and loss.


NO TROUBLE NEED BE BORROWED.

EDITORIAL IN CONGREGATIONALIST

As for the matter of the entrance of the Home Missionary Society
upon work in the South, that may be trusted to take care of itself.
The two societies mutually have agreed upon a policy of comity
and consultation. Unless there be a real and imperative demand for
its services at the South, the Home Missionary Society probably
will find all that it can do in its present field. If such a demand
arise, the Society will do its best to meet it, not in rivalry of,
but in co-operation with, the Missionary Association. There may be
localities where the former can work in the same line to better
advantage than the latter. Nobody need borrow trouble on their
account, for both are pledged, and honestly, we are sure, to keep
out of each other’s way when necessary, and together to erase “the
color line” as fast as possible.


CRITICISMS NOTED.

EDITORIAL IN ADVANCE.

We fear that many of those who are criticising the policy of the
society (A. H. M. S.), in pushing its work in the South, know
little or nothing either of the New West or of the South. We call
the attention of Dr. Bacon, and the minority which he represents,
to a few facts. In the first place, the American Missionary
Association cannot reach the white people of the South. In proof of
this we appeal to agents of that society, who are in the field—Dr.
Roy and the missionaries down South. One of the missionaries has
just been in this office and gave his testimony most freely, while
we were reading the proof of Dr. Bacon’s article. He said: “I have
been three years in Alabama. I am pastor of a colored church there.
We are prosperous. We were never more so. The Southern people are
coming more and more to labor with us, and to co-operate with us
in every way for the education of the negro. But there must be a
colored church for colored people, and a white church for white
people, and this will be done without saying anything about it.
Both races prefer it, and it is a natural method. Our society
cannot reach the white people, we ought not to attempt to do so.” *
* *

There is a call for the work of the American Home Missionary
Society in the South. To refuse to go there would be wicked. That
society has just as much right to build a church in Mississippi or
Georgia, and to give it aid, as it has to aid a church in Iowa or
Dakota. No other society has a right to bid it keep north of Mason
and Dixon’s line.


WHO SHALL WORK AT THE SOUTH?

BY REV. J. E. ROY, D.D.

_To the Editor of the Advance_:

In your response to Dr. Bacon on this question, you said: We appeal
to Dr. Roy. I did not understand you as committing me; but finding
that some brethren took you as setting me down to the theory that
the A. M. A. could not do the work among the white people there
because of its relation to the colored, I wish to disavow it, for I
never held that view, never expressed it. I think that the A. M. A.
_could_ do that work if the constituency shall so direct, though,
as our experience among the mountain people of Kentucky proved, it
would require patience, wisdom and fortitude, and would be a slow
process.

                                                _The Advance._


RESOLUTION AT SARATOGA MEETING.

Voted, That a committee of five be appointed who shall consider our
denominational work in the South and confer with the secretaries of
the American Missionary Association, or any committees appointed
by that society, in reference to the same, and report at our next
meeting.

Committee to confer with the American Missionary Association—Rev.
Drs. J. E. Twichell, G. L. Walker, Lyman Abbott, C. L. Goodell, and
A. S. Barnes, Esq.

                                        _The Home Missionary._




BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

MISS D. E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

       *       *       *       *       *


FROM OUR LADY MISSIONARY, WILMINGTON, N.C.

MISS A. E. FARRINGTON.

My work the past month has been very encouraging. Mrs. Steele has
been with us and special meetings were held among the women and
girls. At one of these about 90 were present, and many seemed
deeply interested. At the close quite a number rose for prayers and
remained for personal conversation. After the meeting that night,
which was also quite full, the same girls remained, and several
expressed the hope that they had given their hearts to Jesus. Some
of them had been very thoughtful for weeks, and seemed to need just
the help that these meetings gave to bring them to a decision. A
meeting of the boys was also held. The girls begged me to keep on
with meetings for them, which I have very gladly done every Monday
after school, from twenty to thirty-five coming in. Nine or ten
of them hope they have become Christians. Several of them wish to
unite with the church at once. They were examined and their friends
consulted, and three were propounded for admission, but will not be
received until they have had a little time to test their sincerity.
Influences have been brought to bear to draw them away from us.
They have been told that there is no religion where everything is
so quiet, and endeavors have been made to get them into revival
meetings which are wild with excitement. Last week some of our
teachers went into one of these meetings, where several girls were
rolling on the floor, crying and moaning. One lady thought she saw
one of her scholars among them, and going to her held out her hand
and told her to get up. She obeyed at once, and her teacher led her
to a seat, where she talked to her quietly a few moments, telling
her that God did not require any such thing as that of her or any
one else, that her good conduct in school and elsewhere lately
was stronger evidence that she had given her heart to Jesus than
anything she saw there. Afterwards she went to another part of the
church, where others of her scholars were, quieting them, some
going home as soon as they saw her. These lambs of the flock need
to be very tenderly guarded, and others seem only waiting to be led
along the right way.

       *       *       *       *       *


A VALUED WORKER GONE.

Rev. Dr. Woodworth, of our Boston office, in a commemorative
address on the death of Mrs. D. L. Furber, of Newton Centre, Mass.,
gives an account of her devotion to the cause of missions, in
language fitted to arouse, in no common degree, the zeal of the
Christian women of the country. He says:

She had the rare faculty, perhaps I should say double faculty,
of comprehending a great cause, and at the same time of making
individual cases all her own. I have heard her talk of the work
in the South _as a work for the African race_, until her tongue
thrilled with eloquence, her face shone with a strange light, and
her whole person seemed to expand to the measure of her theme. To
her it seemed so strange that people did not see what to her was so
plain: that the churches were so slow to accept their opportunity;
that the very _conjuncture_ of the death of slavery and the opening
of the African continent by exploration and commerce were a
demonstration that they were part and parcel of the same plan and
pattern, and meant the salvation of the African race. Why could not
the churches see it? Had blindness happened to the people of God?
How hot and fast her words fell, as she pictured the possibilities
which lay in the Southern work, and as she expressed her amazement
at the failure of good people to discern the signs of the times!

To _her_ these four millions coming out of the house of their
bondage, _in need of every thing_, were Christ himself, hungry,
thirsty, naked, homeless—a stranger. In them she saw her Lord; in
them she heard _His_ cry of distress; in them, as unto _Him_, she
gave her sympathies, her time, her bounty. She walked under the
light of that vision which so glorified her life. Each one of that
suffering race whom she took into her family, to whom she sent
clothing, or aided in his course of education, represented _Him_.

Another thing which struck me was what seemed a thorough mental
honesty; and by this I mean that she took the widest survey of the
field of which she was capable, and formed her judgments after full
collation of the facts. Like the ideal scientist seeking light from
every quarter, and open to its reception, come from where it might,
she was ready to follow the truth wherever it might lead. She
submitted her judgment to her intelligence, and was not afraid to
obey her convictions. She loved the slave when it was not popular
to do so. She was on the side of the weak when only a few stood
with her. She counted the cost and took the stand for righteousness
and truth. She saw in them clearly the humanity now represented on
the throne, and for _that_ would have gone down among them with
perfect serenity and cheerfulness, bidding every offended sense
and feeling _be still_. She had schooled herself to do right. She
had said to her soul, “I will do for the poor as I would do for my
Lord.”

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHUNG WAH.

BY SUSIE W. HASSELL.

He is a bright little ten-year-old who lives in a town away off
West. You know by his name that he is Chinese, and I am afraid
some of you have already turned up your noses in disgust, and
have thought, “Bah! those dirty Chinamen! My mamma says it makes
her sick to think of them, and papa’s glad they can’t come to our
country any more.” But let me tell you about Chung Wah, and then
you can decide the Chinese question for yourselves.

He is in the A class in Number Two, and in the schoolroom his
yellow face is almost always bright with soap-suds and joy, for he
is a wonderfully happy boy, and smiles all the time he is happy.
His little black eyes look like apple-seeds, and snap whenever he
winks. He wears great flapping brown pantaloons, which are covered
to the knee by his pink calico aprons, but on Wednesday, when he
speaks his piece, he has on a white apron, so stiffly starched
that it rustles and cracks like paper. His low cloth shoes have no
heels, but long, pointed, turned-up toes. Chung Wah is very quick
at his lessons, and neat in his slate-work, so that when visitors
come in his slate is one of the first the teacher shows them.

He has always loved to study, but last May, when the days commenced
to be warm and bright, he must have grown a little tired of school,
for, alas, a great many times he was seen on the street the whole
day long. When questioned the next morning, he told the teacher:
“My fadder send me to school an’ I no come.” I suppose he liked to
pitch horseshoes with the other boys down in Chinatown, none of
them had to go to school; or to follow old Sam Lee round the town
as he gathered up the clothes for the wash-house. At any rate he
played truant many days, until his teacher sent him up-stairs for
the school superintendent to talk with him. Still the truancy was
repeated, and he gave no excuse only, “I no likee come dat day.” At
last, one morning, the superintendent whipped him for truancy, and
poor little Chung Wah went down-stairs with both fists in his eyes
and a very sore heart.

[Illustration: A CHINESE GARDEN.]

That very afternoon, just before the tardy bell rang, who should
walk into the superintendent’s room but Chung Wah, his face still
downcast and troubled. He held a preserve jar, covered with
Chinese characters, in one hand, and in the other a bright silk
handkerchief, such as are sold in the Chinese shops. With an
awkward little nod, just as if he were going to speak a piece in
school, he said: “My fadder gib ’em to you. He say you heap good
man. He likee you beat me ebly day I no go school.”

Brave little Mongolian! Do you think you clean, white boys and
girls could have carried such a hard message as that so honestly?

Somehow, after he had said the words the lump in his throat seemed
to grow easier, and, although the superintendent said some words
not very comforting: “Well, Chung Wah, tell your father I will
punish you when you are truant from school”—yet when the boy went
down-stairs this time his face beamed as though it had never known
a tear, and his little black cue bobbed merrily behind him.

A good many months have passed since then, and he has never
deserved another whipping. I don’t believe he will. His teacher
says he has a wise father, and that if there were more fathers
like him there would be more good boys in school, but I say, brave
little Chung Wah! The boy who can tell the truth when it is so hard
to tell has a clean side to his heart, though his face may be very
yellow.

What do you say, my white boys and girls? Would he be a bad
playfellow for you?

If some fifteen or twenty years from now you should hear that the
grown-up Chinaman, Chung Wah, fills well any position of honor and
trust, don’t be surprised, but tell _your_ boys and girls, “Oh,
yes, when he was a little fellow he was brave enough to obey his
father, and tell the whole truth.”

                                                _The Advance._

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR JULY, 1883.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $76.18.

    Bangor. Ladies of Third Ch., _freight for
      Wilmington, N.C._                                       $1.28
    Bingham. “A Friend”                                       11.00
    Bluebill. Mrs. Stevens ($1 _of which for
      Indian M._)                                              2.00
    Castine. Mrs. B. A. Sewall, Trunk of C.
    Gray. Girls’ Mission Circle, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            2.00
    Hallowell. S. S. Classes of the Classical
      Academy, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                  24.40
    St. Albans. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             5.00
    Skowhegan. Cong. Ch., 20; Mrs. L. W. Weston,
      4.50; Miss Sarah Tilton, 1                              25.50
    South Berwick. Mrs. Lewis’ S. S. Class, _for
      Student Aid, Wilmington, N.C._                           5.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $351.94.

    Amherst. Cong. Ch.                                         7.62
    Center Harbor. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., to
      const. JENNIE C. BLACKEY L. M.                          30.00
    Concord. South Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      MRS. MARY G. BATCHELDER L. M.                           47.66
    Durham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                18.00
    Exeter. Second Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      20.00
    Fitzwilliam. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           27.50
    Henniker. Miss E. F. Connor                                5.00
    Hudson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 6.00
    Laconia. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               20.79
    New Market. T. H. Wiswall                                 10.00
    North Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         17.15
    Peterborough. Union Evan. Ch.                             20.17
    Pittsfield. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           12.28
    Temple. Rev. Geo. Goodyear                                 5.00
    Troy. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            20.59
    Webster. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               20.00
    Winchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            36.50
                                                            -------
                                                            $324.26

    LEGACIES.

    Cornish. Estate of Mrs. Sarah W. Westgate, by
      Albert E. Wellman, Trustee                              27.68
                                                            -------
                                                            $351.94


  VERMONT, $370.42.

    Brandon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               17.56
    Brattleborough. E. C. Crosby, _for Talladega
      C._                                                     10.00
    Chester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               11.22
    Grafton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                8.27
    Lyndon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                26.00
    Manchester. Miss Ellen Hawley, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      50.00
    Middlebury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            42.50
    North Craftsbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       6.00
    Pittsford. “L. J.”                                        12.00
    Putney. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 7.25
    Saxton’s River. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         9.15
    West Newbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           6.93
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             63.54
                                                            -------
                                                            $270.42

    LEGACIES.

    Grafton. Estate of Caroline B. Akin, by
      William Hastings, Ex.                                  100.00
                                                            -------
                                                            $370.42


  MASSACHUSETTS, $4,305.36.

    Amherst. First Cong. Ch., 25; William M.
      Graves, 20                                              45.00
    Andover. Elmira Jones                                      5.00
    Ashby. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 13.65
    Ashfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. LEVI
      H. VINCENT L. M.                                        44.63
    Bradford. Mrs. S. C. Boyd                                 14.00
    Braintree. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       11.25
    Bridgewater. Chas. L. Prince, Bundle of Books
    Brookline. Harvard Ch. and Soc.                           90.03
    Cambridge. G. F. Kendall (10 of which _for
      Chinese M._)                                            25.00
    Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Ch. and Soc.                      319.65
    Campello. Mrs. Allen Leach                                 0.50
    Charlton. Cong. Ch., 13.90, and Sab. Sch., 1.96           15.86
    Chelsea. Third Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         23.45
    Chelsea. Ladies’ Union Home Mission Band, _for
      Lady Missionary, Chattanooga, Tenn._                    75.00
    Chelsea. Ladies’ Union Home Mission Band, 3
      bbls. and 2 boxes of C., Val. 92, _for
      Chattanooga, Tenn._
    Curtisville. Miss Mary Lumbert                             0.50
    Danvers. Maple St. Ch. and Soc.                           56.31
    East Hampton. Mrs. E. G. Williston, 100; First
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., 46.24                              146.24
    Fairhaven. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       10.00
    Fall River. Central Ch. Mission Sab. Sch.,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         70.00
    Fitchburg. Mrs. Mary Johnson                              10.00
    Gardner. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         35.96
    Gloucester. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      30.00
    Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch.                             244.21
    Haydenville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           16.10
    Holyoke. Second Cong. Ch.                                 23.00
    Hyde Park. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             16.00
    Lanesville. Cong. Ch.                                      1.75
    Lawrence. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        17.12
    Lee. Cong. Ch.                                            32.41
    Lexington. Hancock Ch. and Soc.                           38.00
    Long Meadow. Ladies Benev. Ass’n.                         13.97
    Marlborough. Union Ch.                                    55.31
    Methuen. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          4.20
    Merrimac. Cong. Ch., to const. REV. W. H.
      HUBBARD L. M.                                           30.00
    Millbury. First. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       59.55
    Millbury. Second Cong. Ch., _for Atlanta U._              16.74
    Natick. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for a Teacher_                  50.00
    Natick. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                25.00
    Newburyport. Miss Mary Plummer, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                            5.00
    Newton. Eliot Ch. and Soc.                               200.00
    Newton Center. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   65.32
    Newton Highlands. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      46.27
    North Andover. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      REV. HORACE H. LEAVITT L. M.                            60.00
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      150; Union Ch. and Soc., 10                            160.00
    Pittsfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      50.00
    Roxbury. Immanuel Ch. and Soc.                           100.00
    South Amherst. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          5.79
    South Boston. Phillips Ch. and Soc.                      100.00
    Springfield. “H. M.,” 500; South Cong. Ch.,
      27.87; Mrs. Edward Clarke, 5                           532.87
    Sterling. “Sterling”                                       5.00
    Templeton. Trinitarian Ch. and Soc.                       20.95
    Waltham. Mrs. Joseph Stackpole                             0.50
    West Boxford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          13.43
    West Midway. Cong. Sab. Sch., 19; C. Albert
      Adams, 5                                                24.00
    Westport. Pacific Union Sab. Sch.                          1.84
    West Springfield. Park St. Cong. Ch.                      16.02
    Wilbraham. Cong. Ch.                                      21.50
    Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                             16.75
    Winchendon. “F. T. J.”                                     2.00
    Worcester. Union Ch. and Soc. to const. BENJ.
      F. HARRINGTON, Mrs. ISSAC SARGENT and FRANK
      H. HOLLAND, L. Ms                                      106.00
    Worcester. Salem Street Mission Workers, _for
      Indian boy, Hampton N. & A. Inst._                      25.00
    ——. “Friend to the Cause”                                 25.00
    ——. “For Mission work among the Indians”                   4.00
    Massachusetts Bible Soc., 2 boxes of Bibles,
      _for Avery Inst._
                                                          ---------
                                                          $3,292.63

    LEGACIES.

    Cambridge. Estate of Abijah F. Hildreth by
      Edwin Hildreth and Stanley B. Hildreth,
      Executors and Trustees                                 500.00
    Natick. Estate of Clarissa Morse, by Willard
      W. Wight, Adm’r.                                       100.00
    North Abington. Estate of Mrs. Susan B. Frost,
      by Mrs. Rachel B. Reed, Admx.                          162.73
    North Brookfield. Estate of Miss Lydia C.
      Dodge, by W. P. Haskell, Ex.                           250.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $4,305.36


  RHODE ISLAND, $1,005.00.

    Bristol. Miss Charlotte De Wolf, 500; Mrs. M.
      D. W. Rogers, 500                                    1,000.00
    Westerly. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Wilmington,
      N.C._                                                    5.00


  CONNECTICUT, $11,815.83.

    Berlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                  20.20
    Bridgeport. Park St. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   11.80
    Durham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          50.00
    Enfield. First Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
    Farmington. Cong. Ch.                                     64.10
    Greenfield Hill. Cong. Ch.                                 8.80
    Guilford. First Cong. Ch., 18; “A Friend in
      Third Ch.,” 2                                           20.00
    Hartford. “A Friend in Asylum Hill Cong. Ch.”             20.00
    Jewett City. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           10.00
    Kent. First Cong. Soc.                                     5.94
    Lebanon. First Ch., 64.86; Mrs. Mary Dutton,
      4.50                                                    69.36
    Meriden. E. K. Breckenridge, 5; Mrs. S. F. S.
      Brown, a Quilt                                           5.00
    Middletown. South Cong. Ch.                               69.71
    Mount Carmel. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        50.00
    North Haven. E. Dickerman                                  2.00
    Norwich. Park Cong. Ch. and Soc., 272.54;
      Broadway Cong. Ch., 200                                472.54
    Norwich. Henry B. Norton, _for Atlanta U._                50.00
    Oxford. Cong. Ch., 28.50, and Sab. Sch., 6.25,
      to const MRS. CARRIE RIGGS L. M.                        34.75
    Plantsville. “A Friend,” _for Atlanta U._                  5.00
    Plainville. “A Friend”                                   100.00
    Portland. First Cong. Ch.                                  7.00
    Salisbury. Cong. Ch.                                      46.76
    Saybrook. Second Cong. Ch.                                20.25
    Sharon. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             68.28
    Southport. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. MRS.
      O. H. PERRY, CHAS. LACEY, E. CORNELIUS
      SHERWOOD, L. FRANK SHERWOOD and REV. WILLIAM
      H. HOLMAN L. Ms                                        185.84
    Stanwich. Mr. and Mrs. Charles Brush                      25.00
    Torrington. Young Ladies’ Aux. Soc., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              70.00
    West Hartford. Charles Boswell                           250.00
    West Haven. Mrs. E. C. Kimball                            10.00
    Winsted. David Strong, _for Theo. Dept.,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    ——. “A Friend”                                            17.50
                                                          ---------
                                                          $1,815.83

    LEGACIES.

    Hartford. Estate of John B. Eldridge, by John
      R. Redfield, Ex.                                    10,000.00
                                                         ----------
                                                         $11,815.83


  NEW YORK, $785.67.

    Antwerp. First Cong. Ch.                                  33.18
    Binghamton. First Cong. Ch.                               80.55
    Brentwood. E. F. Richardson                               25.00
    Brooklyn. Sab. Sch. of Central Cong. Ch., for
      _Missionary, Ladies’ Island, S.C._                      75.00
    Brooklyn. Church of the Covenant                          10.00
    Chittenango. Mrs. Ameline L. Brown                         5.00
    Clifton Springs. “A Friend”                                1.00
    Coxsackie. Mrs. E. F. Spoor, 2.50; Miss A. G.
      Fairchild, 2.50                                          5.00
    Danby. Cong. Ch., bal. to const. H. B. CHAPMAN L. M.      18.35
    East Bloomfield. First Cong. Ch.                          52.80
    Gloversville. Cong. Ch.                                  102.57
    Ithaca. E. P. Gilbert                                      5.00
    Jamesport. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
    Lenox. A. S. Johnson                                       5.00
    Lisbon Center. First Cong. Ch.                            18.00
    Martinsburg. Horatio Hough, 5; Almira H.
      Arthur, 1; “A Friend,” 1                                 7.00
    New York. S. T. Gordon                                   250.00
    New York. Colored Orphan Asylum (5 of which
      _for John Brown Steamer_)                               10.00
    North Evans. Cong. Ch. (1.50 of which from
      Mrs. Spencer Bullock)                                    8.17
    Oneonta. Mrs. L. J. Safford                                5.00
    Patchogue. Cong. Ch.                                       9.28
    Spencerport. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                       20.00
    Walton. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                             32.27
    Westmoreland. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.                 2.50


  NEW JERSEY, $233.50.

    Bound Brook. Cong. Ch.                                    38.50
    Irvington. Rev. A. Underwood                              50.00
    Montclair. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Indian
      girl, Hampton, N. & A. Inst._                           40.00
    Montclair. Mrs. Pratt’s S. S. Class, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                               5.00
    Morristown. Miss Ella M. Graves, _for Atlanta
      U._                                                    100.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $37.50.

    East Smithfield. Miss Polly S. Tracy                      18.00
    Jeansville. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                5.00
    New Milford. Horace A. Summers                            14.50


  OHIO, $2,629.22.

    Ashland. Mrs. Eliza Thompson                               2.28
    Atwater. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               27.39
    Bronson. Rev. H. Lawrence, Bbl. of Bibles;
      Mrs. F. Lawrence 1 set Henry’s Commentaries,
      _for Talladega C._
    Harmar. Cong. Ch.                                        118.75
    Lodi. Cong. Ch.                                           11.25
    Madison. Ladies, Books, and 3., for Freight,
      _for Talladega C._                                       3.00
    Mansfield. Mrs. Tracy, _for Trinity Sch.,
      Athens, Ala._                                           50.00
    Mount Vernon. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., of Cong. Ch.           10.00
    Oberlin. Miss Rose M. Kinney                               1.00
    Painesville. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Atlanta U._                                             50.00
    Painesville. First Cong. Ch., bal to const.
      SAMUEL R. HOUSE and E. E. JOHNSON L. Ms                 36.55
    Peru. “Friends,” _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                     13.00
    Randolph. W. J. Dickinson                                 10.00
    Unionville. Rev. J. C. Burnell                             2.00
                                                             ------
                                                            $335.22

    LEGACIES.

    Kent. Estate of Andrew James                             394.00
    Tallmadge. Estate of Rev. John Seward, by Wm.
      H. Upson, Ex.                                        1,900.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $2,629.22


  ILLINOIS, $639.58.

    Amboy. First Cong. Ch.                                    43.00
    Chebanse. Cong. Ch.                                        6.00
    Chicago. Union Park Cong. Ch., 255.18; Bethany
      Cong. Ch., 13.35                                       267.43
    Chicago. Ladies Miss’y Soc. of N. E. Ch., _for
      Lady Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                          14.00
    Elgin. Mrs. E. E. C. Borden                                1.00
    Galesburg. First Cong. Ch., 79; First Ch. of
      Christ, 5                                               84.00
    Geneseo. Ladies Miss’y Soc., _for Needmore
      Ch., Talladega_                                         50.00
    Griggsville. Cong. Ch.                                    23.85
    Princeville. Chas. Cutter                                  5.00
    Sycamore. First Cong. Ch.                                100.60
    Sycamore. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Thomasborough. “R.”                                        1.00
    Udina. Cong. Ch.                                           1.00
    Wheaton. First. Cong. Ch.                                 17.70


  MICHIGAN, $441.62.

    Benzonia. H. H. Balch                                      1.00
    Calumet. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Theo. Dept.
      Talladega C._                                           38.84
    Chelsea. John C. Winans                                  200.00
    Detroit. Second Cong. Ch.                                120.00
    Fort Huron. Cong. Ch.                                     40.58
    Grand Rapids. E. G. Furness                                5.00
    Kalamazoo. Mrs. J. A. Kent                                 5.00
    Michigan Center. Cong. Ch.                                 4.00
    Salem. Summit Missionary Soc.                              2.59
    Union City. Cong. Sab. Sch., bal. to const.
      MRS. ANNA CHURCH L. M.                                  10.00
    Vienna. Cong. Ch.                                          4.61
    White Lake. Robert Garner                                 10.00


  IOWA, $194.87.

    Algona. A. Zahlten                                         7.50
    Anamosa. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $38.02, and Sab.
      Sch., $4.75                                             42.77
    Belle Plain. Cong. Ch.                                     5.30
    Davenport. Geo. W. Ells                                   10.00
    Des Moines. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 2 bbls. of C.
      _for Talladega C._
    Farragut. Cong. Ch.                                       20.49
    Grinnell. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              93.22
    Tabor. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                              3.59
    Washington. “Mother and Ralph” _for Needmore
      Ch., Talladega C._                                      12.00


  WISCONSIN, $55.22.

    Delavan. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for furnishing
      room, Stone Hall, T. C._                                 5.00
    Lake Geneva. Cong. Ch.                                    17.70
    Leeds. Cong. Ch.                                           2.67
    Koshkonong. P. T. Gunnison                                10.00
    Koshkonong. Cong. Ch.                                      4.30
    Platteville. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               5.30
    Shullsburg. First Cong. Ch.                                4.00
    Springvale. Cong. Ch.                                      6.25


  MINNESOTA, $345.53.

    Audubon. Cong. Ch.                                         2.83
    Austin. Cong. Ch.                                         24.17
    Elk River. Union Cong. Ch.                                 9.20
    Excelsior. Cong. Ch.                                      15.00
    Faribault. Cong. Ch.                                      17.85
    Hutchinson. Cong. Ch.                                      2.55
    Lake City. Joseph Pike (1 of which _for John
      Brown Steamer_)                                          2.00
    Medford. Cong. Ch.                                         4.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 29.83
    Minneapolis. E. D. First Cong. Ch.                        26.10
    Rushford. Cong. Ch.                                        2.00
    ——. Friends, _for Atlanta U._                            200.00
    ——. “Friends in Minnesota” _for Dakota M._                10.00


  KANSAS, $49.95.

    Great Bend. Cong. Church                                   6.00
    Lawrence. Ladies, by Rev. R. F. Markham                   11.45
    McPherson. First Cong. Ch.                                15.00
    Stockton. Cong. Ch.                                        2.50
    Topeka. First Cong. Ch.                                   10.00
    White City. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00


  MISSOURI, $161.88.

    Amity. Cong. Ch., 12.06; “A Friend,” 15                   27.06
    Ironton. J. Markham                                        2.50
    Kansas City. First Cong. Ch.                            102. 00
    Meadville. Cong. Ch.                                      10.32
    Webster Groves. Cong. Ch.                                 20.00


  NEBRASKA, $35.75.

    Crete. First Cong. Ch.                                     7.75
    Lincoln. “K. & C.”                                         8.00
    Santee Agency. Mrs. Mary Van Nest, _for Indian
      M._                                                     20.00


  COLORADO, $5.35.

    Denver. Cong. Ch. (1 of which from Mrs. C. L.
      Garland)                                                 5.35


  NEVADA, $5.00.

    Wells. C. A. Birchard                                      5.00


  WASHINGTON TER., $27.55.

    Skokomish. Cong. Ch., 17.55; Rev. M. Eells and
      Wife, 10.00                                             27.55


  OREGON, $10.00.

    The Dalles. First Cong. Ch.                               10.00


  CALIFORNIA, $4.50.

    Rutherford. Robert McComb                                  4.50


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $437.50.

    Washington. U.S. Government, _for Indian M._             437.50


  KENTUCKY, $5.59.

    Berea. Sab. Sch.                                           5.59


  TENNESSEE, $161.70.

    Chattanooga. Rent                                        149.70
    Knoxville. Second Cong. Ch.                               12.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $11.00.

    Wilmington. Normal Sch., Tuition, $4; Rent,
      $2; Cong. Ch., 5                                        11.00


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $628.30.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition, $618.30;
      Plymouth Ch., $10                                      628.30


  GEORGIA, $345.65.

    Atlanta. Alumni Ass’n of Atlanta U., 125, _for
      Furnishing Room, Stone Hall_; Pellegrini &
      Castleberry, 2 Terra-cotta Vases, _for steps
      of Stone Hall_                                         125.00
    Atlanta. First Cong. Ch., 30; Storrs Sch.,
      Tuition, 5.50                                           35.50
    Macon. Cong. Ch.                                           8.55
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition, 146.60, Rent,
      20, Cong. Ch., 10                                      176.60


  ALABAMA, $503.98.

    Athens. Miss M. F. Wells, _for Trinity Sch.,
      Athens, Ala._                                           25.00
    Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                     20.00
    Talladega. Talladega C., Tuition, 373.98,
      First Cong. Ch., 10                                    383.98
    Talladega. Rev. H. S. DeForest, _for Talladega
      C._                                                     75.00


  FLORIDA, $5.00.

    Daytona. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., by Mrs. E. C.
      Waldron                                                  5.00


  TEXAS, $5.00.

    Helena. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. (2 of which
      _for John Brown Steamer_)                                5.00


  INCOMES, $1,033.75.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                               795.00
    Theological Endowment Fund, _for Howard U._              125.00
    C. F. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._                        50.00
    General Endowment Fund                                    50.00
    Incomes, _for Atlanta U._                                 13.75


  ENGLAND, $10.00.

    Albyns. Miss S. L. Ropes                                  10.00


  SCOTLAND, $59.29.

    Perth. North United Presb. Ch., £10; James
      Balman, _for Chinese M._, £2; “Friend, per
      D. Morton,” 5s.                                         59.29


  AUSTRIA.

    Prague. Bohumil Burda (a little boy) 100
      Kreutzers, _for the colored children in
      America._
                                                        -----------
      Total for July                                     $26,794.18
      Total from Oct. 1 to July 31                      $229,246.69
                                                        ===========


  FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions                                             38.75
    Previously acknowledged                                  700.47
                                                           --------
      Total                                                 $739.22


  FOR ENDOWMENT FUND.

    Holbrook, Mass. Miss Mary W. Holbrook, _for
      Stone Professorship Howard U._                         500.00
                                                             ======

                                        H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
                                                56 Reade St., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




                PLEASE COPY THIS FORM AND MAIL IT.

                                        _September 1st, 1883._

_H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., Treasurer_,

            _56 Reade Street, New York_.

_Enclosed, please find Fifty Cents, subscription for_ THE AMERICAN
MISSIONARY _for the year 1883._

_Send the same to the following address_:

              _Sign with your NAME_,

                      _Your TOWN_,

                              _Your COUNTY_,

                                      _And STATE_ [_in full_].

       *       *       *       *       *




PROPOSED CONSTITUTION OF THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.


ART. I. This society to be called the American Missionary
Association.

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations and diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

ART. III. Members may be constituted for life by the payment of
thirty dollars into the treasury of the Association, with the
written declaration at the time or times of payment that the sum is
to be applied to constitute a designated person a life member; and
such membership shall begin sixty days after the payment shall have
been completed.

Every church which has within a year contributed to the funds of
the Association and every State Conference or Association of such
churches may appoint two delegates to the Annual Meeting of the
Association; such delegates, duly attested by credentials, shall be
members of the Association for the year for which they were thus
appointed.

ART. IV. The Annual Meeting of the Association shall be held in
the month of October or November, at such time and place as may be
designated by the Executive Committee, by notice printed in the
official publication of the Association for the preceding month.

ART. V. The officers of the Association shall be a President,
five Vice-Presidents, a Corresponding Secretary or Secretaries,
a Recording Secretary, a Treasurer, Auditors, and an Executive
Committee of fifteen members, all of whom shall be elected by
ballot.

At the first Annual Meeting after the adoption of this
Constitution, five members of the Executive Committee shall be
elected for the term of one year, five for two years and five for
three years, and at each subsequent Annual Meeting, five members
shall be elected for the full term of three years, and such others
as shall be required to fill vacancies.

ART. VI. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds, the appointing, counseling, sustaining
and dismissing of missionaries and agents, and the selection of
missionary fields. They shall have authority to fill all vacancies
in office occurring between the Annual Meetings; to apply to any
Legislature for acts of incorporation, or conferring corporate
powers; to make provision when necessary for disabled missionaries
and for the widows and children of deceased missionaries, and in
general to transact all such business as usually appertains to the
Executive Committees of missionary and other benevolent societies.
The acts of the Committee shall be subject to the revision of the
Annual Meeting.

Five members of the Committee constitute a quorum for transacting
business.

ART. VII. No person shall be made an officer of this Association
who is not a member of some evangelical church.

ART. VIII. Missionary bodies and churches or individuals may
appoint and sustain missionaries of their own, through the agency
of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. IX. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution except by
the vote of two-thirds of the members present at an Annual Meeting,
the amendment having been approved by the vote of a majority at the
previous Annual Meeting.

       *       *       *       *       *




                  [Illustration: COUNT RUMFORD.]

                            HORSFORD’S

                          ACID PHOSPHATE.

                             (LIQUID.)

                FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
                     EXHAUSTION, NERVOUSNESS,
                   DIMINISHED VITALITY, URINARY
                        DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

              PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF

             Prof. E. N. Horsford, of Cambridge, Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical
authority of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has
ever been offered to the public which seems to so happily meet the
general want as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free
on application.

                        MANUFACTURED BY THE

                      RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,

                         Providence, R.I.,

                  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            SKIN HUMORS

                          CAN BE CURED BY

                       GLENN’S SULPHUR SOAP.

                                 SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 16, 1883.

_Mr. C. N. Crittenton_:

  DEAR SIR: I wish to call your attention to the good your
  Sulphur Soap has done me. For nearly fourteen years I have been
  troubled with a skin humour resembling salt rheum. I have spent
  nearly a small fortune for doctors and medicine, but with only
  temporary relief. I commenced using your “Glenn’s Sulphur Soap”
  nearly two years ago—=used it in baths and as a toilet soap
  daily. My skin is now as clear as an infant’s, and no one would
  be able to tell that I ever had a skin complaint.= I would not
  be without the soap if it cost five times the amount.

  Yours respectfully.                            M. H. MORRIS.

  LICK HOUSE, San Francisco, Cal.

The above testimonial is indisputable evidence that Glenn’s Sulphur
Soap will eliminate poisonous Skin Diseases WHEN ALL OTHER MEANS
HAVE FAILED. To this fact thousands have testified; and that it
will banish lesser afflictions, such as common PIMPLES, ERUPTIONS
and SORES, and keep the skin clear and beautiful, is absolutely
certain. For this reason ladies whose complexions have been
improved by the use of this soap NOW MAKE IT A CONSTANT TOILET
APPENDAGE. The genuine always bears the name of C. N. CRITTENTON,
115 Fulton street, New York, sole proprietor. For sale by all
druggists or mailed to any address on receipt of 30 cents in
stamps, or three cakes for 75 cents.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           J. & R. LAMB,

                        59 Carmine Street.

                  Sixth Ave. cars pass the door.

                          [Illustration]

                              BANNERS

                             IN SILK,

                           NEW DESIGNS.

                         CHURCH FURNITURE.

                    SEND FOR HAND BOOK BY MAIL.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        PEARLS IN THE MOUTH

                          [Illustration]

                       Beauty and Fragrance

                 Are communicated to the mouth by

                             SOZODONT

which renders the _teeth pearly white_, the gums rosy, and the
_breath sweet_. By those who have used it, it is regarded as an
indispensable adjunct of the toilet. It thoroughly _removes tartar_
from the teeth, without injuring the enamel.

                         SOLD BY DRUGGISTS

                            EVERYWHERE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    CHEAPEST BOOK IN THE WORLD.


[Illustration]

=The New American Dictionary, Price Only $1.00=, CONTAINS 1,000
ENGRAVINGS AND 100 PAGES MORE THAN ANY OTHER BOOK OF THE KIND
EVER PUBLISHED. This useful and elegant volume is a Library and
Encyclopedia of general knowledge, as well as the best Dictionary
in the world. Superbly bound in cloth and gilt. No pocket
affair, but a large volume. It contains every useful word in the
English language, with its true meaning, derivation, spelling
and pronunciation, and a vast amount of absolutely necessary
information upon Science, Mythology, Biography, American History,
Insolvent Land and Interest Laws, etc., being a =Perfect Library of
Reference=. Webster’s Dictionary costs $9.00, and the New American
Dictionary costs only $1.00.

                     Read what the Press Says:

“We have examined the New American Dictionary, and find it is a
very valuable book.”—HOUSE AND HOME. “We have never seen its equal,
either in price, finish or contents.”—THE ADVOCATE. “Worth ten
times the money.”—TRIBUNE AND FARMER. “A perfect Dictionary and
library of reference.”—LESLIE ILLUSTRATED NEWS. “We have frequent
occasion to use the New American Dictionary in our office, and
regard it well worth the price.”—CHRISTIAN UNION. “With the New
American Dictionary in the library for reference, many other
much more expensive works can be dispensed with, and ignorance
of his country, history, business, law, etc., is inexcusable
in any man.”—SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. “A valuable addition to any
library.”—N.Y. SUN. “There is more real worth than in most books
at ten times the cost.”—N.Y. COMMERCIAL WORLD. Note the price,
=$1.00=, post-paid; =2= copies for =$1.75=.

=Extraordinary Offer.= If any person will get up a Club of Ten, at
$1.00 each, we will send Free as a premium the American Waterbury
Stem-Winding Watch. For a =Club of 15= we will send free a Solid
Silver Hunting Case Watch. For a =Club of 30= we will send free a
Lady’s Solid Gold Hunting-Case Watch. For a =Club of 50= we will
send free a Gent’s Solid Gold Hunting Case Watch. Send a Dollar at
once for a sample copy. You can easily secure one of these watches
in a day or two, or during your leisure time evenings. As to our
reliability, we can refer to the commercial agencies or any express
company in this city. Address

          WORLD MANUFACTURING CO., 122 Nassau Street, New York.


                          THIS SPLENDID
                     COIN SILVER HUNTING CASE

                            WATCH FREE

[Illustration]

                  To any person who will send us
                           an order for

                   15 NEW AMERICAN DICTIONARIES

                        At One Dollar Each.

Any person can readily secure Fifteen Subscribers in one or two
hours, or in a single evening. If you want a good SOLID COIN SILVER
WATCH, and want to get it WITHOUT MONEY, you can easily do so. Send
ONE DOLLAR for a sample copy of the NEW AMERICAN DICTIONARY, and
see how easily you can get up a club of FIFTEEN.

If you don’t care to get up a club yourself, will you kindly hand
this to some person whom you think would like to get the watch. 48
page illustrated catalogue FREE. Send money by registered letter or
P. O. money order. Send all orders to

         WORLD MANUFACTURING CO., 122 Nassau Street, New York.


  OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR OF THE TREASURY, POST-OFFICE DEPARTMENT, }
                                WASHINGTON, D.C., Jan. 29, 1883. }

WORLD MANUFACTURING CO.:

The New American Dictionary ordered Jan 15 at hand. I obtained
fourteen subscribers in about as many minutes last Saturday, and
find the Post-Office Department is a good field to work in. The
book proves to be just the thing for office use. I have many more
promised, and will send another larger order. Send the Silver Watch
as premium for this club. Respectfully,

                                               ROBERT H. WOOD.


                                               April 30, 1883.
WORLD MANUFACTURING CO.:

Inclosed find money order for Ten Dollars, as part payment for

  27 New American Dictionaries, at $1 each        $27.00
   6 Bible Dictionaries, at $1.40 each              8.40
  23 Shakespeares, at $1.50 each                   34.50
                                                  ------
             Total                                $69.90

Will pay balance of bill at express office. Please send the $50
Domestic Sewing Machine for my premium The books sell readily, and
give satisfaction. Will send you a larger order soon.

                           Yours truly,
                             STELLA S. BECKWITH, McHenry, Ill.


                                               April 30, 1883.
WORLD MANUFACTURING CO.:

GENTLEMEN: Find inclosed One Hundred and Ten Dollars for 100 New
American Dictionaries. Send Bible Dictionaries and Shakespeare’s
Works for the extra ten dollars. I will take the $50 Domestic
Sewing Machine and the Gold Watch for my premiums. I sent you Fifty
Dollars last month, and will send you more orders soon. Ship books
at once, and oblige

          CHARLES O’DONNELL, New Tacoma, Washington Territory.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    7 PER CENT. to 8 PER CENT.

                     Interest Net to Investors

                    In First Mortgage Bonds ON

                         IMPROVED FARMS in

                          Iowa, Minnesota

                            and Dakota,

                            SECURED BY

                        ORMSBY BROS. & CO.,

                  BANKERS, LOAN AND LAND BROKERS,

                         EMMETSBURG, IOWA.


          _11 Years’ Experience. Loans Absolutely Safe._

        References and Circulars forwarded on Application.


            _BRANCH BANKS AT MITCHELL AND HURON, D.T._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,

                   FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A

                       COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A

                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

[Illustration:

  SMITH
  AMERICAN
  ORGANS]

ARE THE BEST.


                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at

  BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
  LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
  KANSAS CITY, Mo., 817 Main Street;
  ATLANTA, GA., 27 Whitehall Street;
  Or, DEFIANCE, O.

                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  THE
  RISING SUN
  STOVE POLISH]

    For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil,
    For freeness from dust and slowness to soil,
    And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed,
    And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

    Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
    The half risen sun every package should bear;
    For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use,
    And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                  ANNUAL MEETING OF THE A. M. A.


The Thirty-seventh Annual Meeting of the American Missionary
Association will be held in the Central Congregational Church,
Brooklyn, N.Y. (Dr. Behrends), beginning Tuesday, October 30 at 3
P.M. and closing on the evening of Thursday, November 1.

The sermon will be preached by Rev. John L. Withrow, D.D., of
Boston, Mass., Tuesday evening, at 7:30, to be followed by the
communion service.

The citizens of Brooklyn will cordially welcome to their homes
all persons in attendance at the meetings. Those wishing such
hospitality are requested to forward their applications to Richard
M. Montgomery, 169 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N.Y., before October
15, specifying in their letters the time of their proposed arrival.

Applicants will receive cards of introduction to families in which
they will be entertained. Should any person after receiving a card
of assignment decide not to attend the meetings, he will please
notify the Committee at once, that his place may be given to some
other applicant.

Negotiations are in progress to secure reduced rates of travel over
different railway and steamboat lines, the results of which will be
given at an early day.

Any further information which may be needed will be gladly
furnished on application to either of the undersigned.

  WM. G. HOOPLE, Chairman, 325 Greene Avenue.
       RICHARD M. MONTGOMERY, Secretary, 169 Columbia Heights.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: ESTEY ORGAN

  J. Estey & Co
  Brattleboro Vt.]

As musical culture increases it demands in musical instruments for
home, church, or school, excellence in tone, tasteful workmanship,
and durability.


                  SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


        ATKIN & PROUT, Printers, 12 Barclay St., New York.




Transcribers Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions silently
corrected. Inconsistent hyphenation retained, due to the
multiplicity of authors.

Changed “beqeath” to “bequeath” on the inside front cover (I
bequeath to my executor).

Opening quote on page 267 has been left unclosed as it is unclear
where the appropriate close should be (must be abandoned decidedly).

Changed “pereferred” to “preferred” on page 270 (would have
preferred to remain).

Changed “incase” to “in case” on page 273 (in case of proposals).

Changed “superindentency” to “superintendency” on page 274 (a
common superintendency)

Added missing “e” to “Jamesport” in the Jamesport entry on page 284.

Changed “Fragance” to “Fragrance” on page 287 (Beauty and
Fragrance).

Added missing “t” to “Waterbury” on page 288 (American Waterbury
Stem-Winding Watch)

Added missing “a” to “Case” on page 288 (Solid Silver Hunting Case
Watch)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER, 1883 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.