[Illustration: OCTOBER, 1883.

VOL. XXXVII.

NO. 10.

The American Missionary]




CONTENTS


                                                         PAGE.


  EDITORIAL.

    ANNUAL MEETING—GOOD AS THREE WEEKS REVIVAL             289
    CONCERT EXERCISE—REV. STEPHEN R. RIGGS, D.D.           290
    OUR INDIAN WORK                                        291
    A VISIT TO THE DAKOTA MISSION                          292
    THE RELATIONS OF THE CHURCH TO THE COLORED RACE        294
    PAMPHLET NO. 8—A HYMN BOOK FOR OUR CHURCHES            296
    A LIFE NOT TOO LONG—BENEFACTIONS                       297
    GENERAL NOTES—AFRICA, INDIAN, CHINESE                  298
    A MARAUDING PARTY IN AFRICA (cut)                      299
    REFLEX INFLUENCE OF A. M. A.                           301
    WHITE TOP MOUNTAIN, VIRGINIA (cut)                     302


  THE SOUTH.

    NOTES OF AN EDUCATIONAL TOUR IN LOUISIANA AND
      MISSISSIPPI                                          303
    A WORD FROM TILLOTSON INSTITUTE                        305
    LETTER FROM FLORENCE, ALA.                             306
    LETTER FROM MCINTOSH, GA.—ITEMS FROM THE FIELD         307


  THE CHINESE.

    RECRUITS FOR THE SOUTH CHINA MISSION                   309


  BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

    MEETING OF BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK—THE PAPER MISSION
      AND WHAT CAME OF IT                                  310


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    A TALK WITH THE CHILDREN                               312
    TOPSY LEFT ALONE (cut)                                 313


  RECEIPTS                                                 315


  PROPOSED CONSTITUTION                                    317

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK:
         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,
                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.
          Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y.,
                      as second-class matter.

                 *       *       *       *       *




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


PRESIDENT.

  Hon. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


TREASURER.

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


AUDITORS.

  M. F. READING.
  WM. A. NASH.


EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman; A. P. FOSTER, Secretary; LYMAN
ABBOTT, ALONZO S. BALL, A. S. BARNES, C. T. CHRISTENSEN, FRANKLIN
FAIRBANKS, CLINTON B. FISK, S. B. HALLIDAY, SAMUEL HOLMES, CHARLES
A. HULL, SAMUEL S. MARPLES, CHARLES L. MEAD, WM. H. WARD, A. L.
WILLISTON


DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

  Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D., _Boston_.
  Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
  Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to
the Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting
fields, to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of
the “American Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New
York Office; letters for the Bureau of Woman’s Work, to Miss D. E.
Emerson, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association,’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                        FINEST ARCADIA BEST
                            VELVETEEN.


GODEY’S

LADY’S BOOK

SAYS:

“The ARCADIA VELVETEEN. It is ... much sought after for jackets and
trimmed suits for children’s costumes and ladies’ dinner dresses.
Its cost is also an element in its success, as it can be purchased
at the same price as ordinary brands.”

[Illustration]

                     FOR CHILDREN’S COSTUMES,

                  THERE IS NOTHING IN THE MARKET
                     THAT CAN COMPARE WITH THE

                             ARCADIA.

_The advantages claimed for this Velveteen are not few. First, the
color, which is positive and lustrous in all shades. The appearance
is certainly very handsome and not easily distinguished from
velvet; it is thinner and finer in texture, and consequently less
heavy than ordinary velveteen, and takes the needle more easily
than any other make, and finally it will outwear any other material
of equal finish and dress._

[Illustration]

THE

BAZAR

SAYS:

“The ARCADIA VELVETEEN is an improvement upon ordinary velveteen
that is sure to be thoroughly appreciated, not only during the
coming winter, but for many seasons.”

For the protection of the consumer we stamp every yard.

                              ARCADIA
                             VELVETEEN
                           (REGISTERED)

Be sure and look on the back of goods, and see you find this stamp.

  =SOLD BY= all Dry Goods Dealers, and at Wholesale by
  SHAEN & CHRISTIE, 165 Church St., New York, U.S.A.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

          VOL. XXXVII.     OCTOBER, 1883.        NO. 10.

                 *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNUAL MEETING.

Preparations for our forthcoming Annual Meeting, to convene in the
Central Church, Brooklyn, October 30, are progressing favorably.
The indications are that we shall have one of the most important
meetings ever held by this Association. We hope to be able to
announce through the religious press and otherwise, in good season,
such particulars relating to speakers and accommodations as will be
of interest to our readers. For the present we refer them to the
announcement on the 4th page cover of this MISSIONARY.

       *       *       *       *       *


GOOD AS THREE WEEKS REVIVAL.

The value of the annual meetings of our great missionary societies
is not measured chiefly by the amount of business transacted,
important and necessary as that is. The information imparted might
be gathered otherwise, but the full benefit to mind and heart can
only be had by participating in the devotions, the instructions in
righteousness, and, indeed, the arousements that are found among
the vast throng that assemble on these occasions. Dr. Withrow said,
at the Saratoga meeting of the Home Missionary Society: “These
three days are worth as much as three weeks revival in giving
a spiritual uplift to the churches.” We believe this to be no
extravagant assertion. Great religious gatherings of some sort have
been common from time immemorial. These have varied according to
the developments of the age.

The problem of the church to-day is the world’s conversion. All
other questions are but side issues. The wonderful developments
of our modern civilization have been preparatory. They have made
it possible for the church to make rapid strides in hastening the
triumphs of the Redeemer’s kingdom. The facilities are ready.
Young men and women with trained faculties for the work are being
graduated from our schools of learning by the thousands. Nothing
is lacking but the disposition—the mind to work. The chief value of
these meetings is seen in their potency to impart this disposition.

It is not many years since there was but one truly great and grand
distinctively missionary annual meeting in our land—the meeting
of the American Board. Then there came well up to the front the
annual meetings of the American Missionary Association, and latest,
the meeting of the Home Missionary Society, which, in point of
attendance from abroad, possibly, outnumbered any one ever held by
the Congregational brethren. Other denominations are progressing in
this direction. There is a wonderfully encouraging development all
along the line. The morning cometh; they who turn their thoughts
to our great missionary enterprises are looking toward it, and not
toward yesterday morning, as men blinded by misbelief continually
look.

We call the attention of our readers to the fact that two of these
great annual meetings convene in October, and we trust that but
few obstacles will be deemed so weighty as to interfere with their
attendance.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE demand for Our Temperance Concert Exercise, issued in the
May MISSIONARY, and also in circular form, has been steady and
encouraging. It was recently used in the First Church, Greenwich,
Conn., with gratifying success. Some features were introduced by
the pastor, Rev. Mr. Kellogg, not contemplated in the preparation
of the exercise. Selections were made from the communications on
temperance published in the same number of the MISSIONARY, and read
by different individuals. Words were adapted to Jubilee Songs,
giving a pleasing variety, and recitations introduced in addition
to, and in place of, those given in the paper. We again call the
attention of our friends to this Concert Exercise, with reference
to its use.

       *       *       *       *       *

REV. STEPHEN R. RIGGS, D.D., LL. D., missionary to the American
Indians for forty years, died at the age of 71, at Beloit, Wis.,
in August. Like Livingstone, in early life, he was desirous of
becoming a missionary to China, but yielded to what he considered
the overrulings of Providence, and in 1837, with his wife,
went into the far Northwest among the Sioux. He reduced their
language to writing, compiled a dictionary and translated the
Holy Scriptures and hymns. Ten well-ordered churches and many
out-stations were established in the region of his operations,
reaching beyond the British line.

As an author, he did good service. His book, “_Mary and I—Forty
Years with the Sioux_,” has magnified the significance of Indian
missions. Another book, “_Gospel Among the Dakotas_,” portrays
vividly scenes of pioneer life. His memorial of Dr. Williamson is a
tribute worthy of the man and his successful efforts in behalf of
the Indians. Four of his children have labored among the Sioux, and
one of his daughters has entered upon work across the Pacific. Rev.
Alfred L. Riggs, principal of our school at Santee, and Thomas L.
Riggs, of Fort Sally, and Mrs. Martha Riggs Morris, at the Sisseton
agency, are carrying on the work so happily inaugurated by their
father. His life was one of incessant missionary toil, in which for
years he had been aided by his children, and to whom he bequeathed
its continuance, and in the midst of whom he passed from earth to
his reward on high.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR INDIAN WORK.

Never was there a more favorable time for enlargement on our
part. The new impulse to the general cause by General Grant’s
peace policy, augmented by the success of the schools at Hampton
and Carlisle, will be still more accelerated by the schools soon
to be completed by the Government at Chilloco, Indian Territory;
Lawrence, Kansas; and Genoa, Neb. When these are finished and
filled, the Indian schools throughout the country will accommodate
10,250 pupils of the 40,000 school population of the Indians at the
present time. Sec. Teller may be too sanguine in the expectation
that with adequate means the Indian problem will not be heard of in
the next generation, but never before could such a prediction come
so near being true. At all events, the nation and the Government
are fully aroused, and it becomes the American Missionary
Association to bestir itself to do its part. This Association
has now the responsibility of doing the Indian work for the
Congregational churches, the American Board having transferred to
it the whole of its Indian missions. A delegation of the Executive
Committee of the Association, consisting of Rev. W. H. Ward, D.D.,
Rev. Addison P. Foster, Charles L. Mead, Esq., and the Secretary,
made recently a thorough inspection of all the schools and missions
with very favorable impressions, a report of which follows.

Enlargement is imperatively needed in three directions, in addition
to the $20,000 for the current work:

1. At the old and well-established mission at the Santee Agency,
Nebraska, Rev. A. L. Riggs thus details the immediate wants of
that station: additional industrial accommodations; extension of
carpenter shop, $250; blacksmith shop, with five forges, $750;
outfit of tools for the same, $150; general dining hall for
200 boarders, with laundry rooms, $5,000; outfit for the same,
including heating arrangements, kitchen ranges, laundry apparatus,
$1,500; making in all $7,650. Boarding-school house for girls at
Oahe, Fort Sully, $2,500.

2. New mission stations and schools among the Indians now
unsupplied. Three station buildings for native teachers on the
Cheyenne River, $1,000; missionary’s house at Cherry Creek,
Cheyenne River, $1,500; mission among the Crows, $2,000.

We invite the friends of Indian progress to select from the items
above given in both fields of enlargement the specific object for
completing which they will aid us in whole or in part.

3. An agricultural, mechanical and Normal School, to be founded
perhaps somewhere in Peoria Bottom, a new Hampton located on the
border, with the white man’s civilization on one hand and the
Indian reservations close on the other. This, though it is an
urgent want and essential to the filling out of our general plan,
must await the careful search for a fitting location and the means
to give it a suitable inauguration.

Where shall the work be done for the Indian? One successful
teacher in Indian schools says that the children should all be
brought East, and trained amid the white man’s civilization;
another gentleman, long connected with a Mission Board, holds
that the education should be given wholly among the tribes, so
that the pupils would be trained amid their people and not away
from sympathy with them. We believe _both_ methods are necessary.
The youth trained at home elevates his people as he rises, and
is himself strengthened and helped by his friends who come from
the East with the higher touch of the white man’s culture. Our
schools and missions, those now in progress and the one proposed,
afford the advantages of both plans. We shall aim to combine the
industrial, normal and religious training so as to fit the pupils,
male and female, for the practical duties of life in the field, the
shop and the home, in the school room, in the pulpit and the church.

We have undertaken much. The hour has come for it, and we know that
the friends of the Indian will not suffer us to fail for want of
means.

       *       *       *       *       *


A VISIT TO THE DAKOTA MISSION.

REV. ADDISON P. FOSTER.

The transfer by the American Board of its Missions among the
Dakota Indians to the American Missionary Association made it
desirable that some of the officers of the Association should
acquaint themselves personally with the work. Accordingly, Rev.
M. E. Strieby, D.D., Secretary of the Association, and Rev. Wm.
Hayes Ward, D.D., of the _Independent_, C. L. Mead, Esq., and
your correspondent, all members of the Executive Committee, met
by appointment at the Santee Agency. Three of the party then
visited the mission station at Oahe, D.T., connected with the
Cheyenne Agency, where the party divided, Dr. Strieby returning
by way of the Sisseton Agency, Dr. Ward and Mr. Foster, under the
leadership of Rev. Thomas L. Riggs, the efficient missionary,
entering the great Sioux Reservation and traveling in an open wagon
between three and four hundred miles, mostly in Indian country.
This last-named expedition had not a little of excitement and
adventure. Camping out at night, fording swollen streams, sleeping
in an Indian wigwam, driving across trackless prairies by the
aid of a compass, running the divides, killing a rattlesnake,
preaching to the wild Indians through an interpreter, spending days
in Indian villages, where hideous heathen mummeries were in full
view, visiting the Indians’ strange earth-built lodges, and their
offensive scaffold burying grounds, we passed through a series of
experiences not soon to be forgotten.

The American Missionary Association has become possessor of three
considerable mission stations among the Indians, in or near Dakota
Territory. At the Santee Agency, which is just across the Missouri
in Nebraska, about thirty miles up the river from Yankton, is a
large and very successful school, a church of Indians with an
Indian pastor, and one out-station with an immediate prospect
of a second. This school and mission work are under the general
superintendence of Rev. Alfred L. Riggs. The children in the
school come not only from the Santees on the Agency, but from long
distances, from the Sisseton Agency, Fort Berthold and Montana.
We were greatly pleased with the intelligence, the neatness and
Christian spirit of these students. They will certainly compare
favorably in every way with the bright young Indians we have seen
at Hampton.

Oahe is the centre of a wide evangelistic work, which has been
organized and is carried on with great energy and success by Rev.
Thomas L. Riggs. At Oahe itself is a mission home, a neat chapel,
also used as a school-house, and three miles away, a second
school-house. A native church is organized here, ministered to most
acceptably by Yellow Hawk, an exemplary and industrious Indian.
We were specially interested in a prayer meeting of Indian women,
which was fully attended and heartily sustained. Oahe is on the
east side of the Missouri, where a considerable number of Indians
have given up their tribal relations, taken up land in severalty,
and become voting citizens of the United States. Immediately
across the river is the Sioux Reservation. This is greatly cut
up by sizable streams which flow down from the Black Hills. On
every stream are extensive and very fertile bottom-lands. Here
the Indians are located, living mostly in tents, but some in log
houses. They are chiefly wild Indians, only a few years since being
on the war-path, mainly different sections of Sitting Bull’s band.
They still wear blankets, and are gaudy in bead-work, and paint
and feathers. But they are now in wholesome fear of the government
and, better still, are anxious to be as white men. Mr. Riggs has
established four stations in Indian villages on the Cheyenne River,
and a fifth on the Grand River. At three of these stations there
is preaching by native pastors, Solomon Martun (or Bear’s Ear),
Isaac Renville and Edward Phelps, by name; at the other places are
schools. The mission at Ft. Berthold is among the Rees, Mandans
and Gros Ventres. These three small tribes long since combined
in one village for protection against their ancient foes, the
Sioux. Rev. C. L. Hall is the missionary here. A mission home and
a chapel are the buildings, both in excellent condition. The work
at this mission is slow in developing results, not from any lack
of faithfulness or adaptation on the part of the missionaries,
for their consecration and fitness are marked, but because these
Indians by their tribal divisions are jealous of one another, and
by their contact in the past with white men of bad character are
corrupt and hard to reach. Mr. Hall has an out-station in his care
at Devil’s Lake, where Rev. David Hopkins, a Sisseton Indian, is
laboring.

                                                  THE ADVANCE.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE RELATIONS OF THE CHURCH TO THE COLORED RACE.

BY REV. LEWIS GROUT.

Rev. Dr. J. L. Tucker’s speech on the above subject before the
Episcopal Church Congress, in Richmond, last October, has had
a very emphatic indorsement from professional and other men in
the South, and yet not without severe criticism from some of the
colored people, especially in Jackson, Miss., the home of Dr.
Tucker, where he made the speech. It seems that Dr. Tucker is a
man of Northern birth, that he was a soldier in the Confederate
army, after which he became a planter, then a rector, and that
he has had much experience and interest in the education of the
colored race, as planter, teacher and minister. And yet, with all
his acquaintance with that race, there are several important points
pertaining to their history, character and welfare, in which he is
sadly mistaken.

The first mistake of his that I will notice has respect to the
character of the native African. In Africa, he says, “human life
has no sacredness, and men, women and children are slain as beasts
are, and even more carelessly, as less valuable. Human suffering
excites no pity, and blood flows like water.” “That what we call
morality, whether in the relations of the sexes, or in the sense of
truthfulness, or in the sense of honesty, has no lodgment whatever
in the native African’s breast;” and that they have “no words” for
gratitude, generosity, industry, truthfulness, honesty, modesty,
gentleness and virtue, because they have none of these ideas.
Now all this, and much more of the same sort, is the baldest of
hyperbole, far from the truth. During my fifteen years of labor in
that land, I made the study of African character and language a
specialty; and I believe that words representing the ideas above
named may be found in every language and dialect on the continent.
As to humanity and all kindred virtues, they are abreast, if not
ahead, of any and every other people that have not had the gospel.
For honesty and morality, under pure native rule, in many respects,
the Zulus and cognate tribes would put to shame the people in every
part of this land of ours. I have no reason to believe that I
ever lost a sixpence worth of anything, through their stealing,
in all those fifteen years of my stay among them; and as to the
relations of the sexes, I believe there are ten illegitimate births
here in New England to-day, where there was ever one in Zululand
previous to the incoming of the Dutch and English. To be sure, all
African tribes may not be abreast of what the Zulus used to be, in
these things. And yet Rev. Dr. Crummell, for many years a college
professor and rector of a parish in Liberia, says: “All along the
west coast of Africa the family tie and the marriage bond are as
strong as among any _primitive_ people.” “Their maidenly virtue,
the instinct to chastity, is a marvel.”

2. Dr. Tucker says the colored people of the South are grossly
immoral. If he had made a very deserved exception of the many
who have been brought under the restraints of the gospel by good
mission work among them, within a few years, his charge would
have been more just. But whence came the great excess in vice
which he avers? Could anything else have been expected from long
generations of the peculiar training their bondage gave them? Under
the treatment they had, as Dr. Tucker says, “they quickly learned
to conceal,” “learned lying, stealing and adultery.” By a somewhat
minute detail, he shows how the familiarity and “the intrigues
which the white men” had with the black women wrought in them, as
he says, “the utter destruction of the very sense of virtue.”

3. Dr. Tucker says nothing of importance has been accomplished by
Northern benevolence for the colored people, except to make them
worse—to “build strongholds for the devil in disguise,” to “build
up the kingdom of evil.” Now all this, in which his speech abounds,
I repudiate as false and slanderous. In the course of forty years
I have seen a good deal of mission work, of one kind and another,
at home and abroad, and under the auspices of almost every society
in the world. I have also seen the work of the American Missionary
Association among the Freedmen; and, as the result of all, I am
free to say, I believe Dr. Tucker may go the world over, time
through, ransack all history, and not be able to point to a time or
place where mission work and money have done more, in proportion to
the means employed, than has been done by this Association among
the colored people since their emancipation, two decades since.

4. Dr. Tucker alleges that Northern missionaries are incompetent,
“don’t know what they are about,” or “how to reach the colored
people,” or “how to deal with them,” “barely know a Negro when they
see him.” Well, I am told there are some white people in the South,
who, themselves “don’t know a Negro when they see him,” in some
cases only as they trace his genealogy and find out who his mother
was. But how should Dr. Tucker, himself, be able to know all about
this matter, how to reach the colored people, how to lift them up,
how to heal them, better than other men of Northern birth?

5. The counterpart of the above charge is, that the Southern whites
are the “only ones” who know how to do good mission work for the
colored race, and that we of the North must put all our money into
their “control.” But what have they ever done to prove such special
fitness to inspire the Negro with confidence in their teaching and
treatment, to prove their own faith in his capacity for a high
order of improvement, to encourage us to put “every dollar” of our
mission money into their hands? Why, after they had had the black
man in their own special teaching and treatment for more than two
centuries, utterly dissevered from pagan Africa, all plastic,
docile and confined, as he was, to their exclusive training, has
his original heathenism been so little improved as to leave the
Negro no better than Dr. Tucker represents him to be. And even now,
what great effort have they made for his improvement in the two
decades that have passed since his emancipation?

Another mistake I find in Dr. Tucker’s speech, the greatest and
most fatal of all, and the last I will notice, is his color line
“plan” for all educational and religious work in the South—a school
and a church on this side of the street for the whites, a school
and a church on that side for the blacks—a double system, with, as
he says, “double the expense.” But neither a system such as that,
nor the spirit that desires or prompts it, will have any place on
earth when the gospel of Christ gets a proper ascendency in the
hearts and lives of men.

       *       *       *       *       *

WE have issued Pamphlet No. 8, on _The Reflex Influence of the
Work of the American Missionary Association_, an address delivered
in Tremont Temple by Rev. S. L. Blake, D.D., Fitchburg, Mass.,
a quotation from which will be found elsewhere. Copies of this
Pamphlet will be supplied gratuitously on application, to those
wishing them for distribution.

       *       *       *       *       *


A HYMN BOOK FOR OUR CHURCHES.

It is the “Manual of Praise,” published by E. J. Goodrich, Oberlin,
Ohio, compiled by the lamented Rev. Dr. Hiram Mead and J. B.
Rice. It has the cream of our hymnology, the worshipful, endeared
hymns to the number of six hundred. It has the wearing pieces of
Moody & Sankey. Compiled not by an ambitious amateur in musical
composition, it does not seek to force upon the churches a great
batch of new and unproven tunes. It was evidently put together for
practical purposes, and is small enough to go into a side or hip
pocket, a “multum in parvo.” It is cheap, coming by the dozen, for
introduction, so as not to cost over sixty cents a copy. It is
suited to all occasions. It has a logical arrangement, which will
be of constant advantage in the use of it, though those who have it
may not know just how the logic comes in, even as the perfection of
the art of elocution is to conceal the art. Where it has been used
in our institutions and schools, it has been much approved. It is
certainly a desideratum for our new churches in the South and in
the West.

       *       *       *       *       *


A LIFE NOT TOO LONG.

One of our regular contributors, in transmitting his donation to
our treasury, accompanies his gift with the following cheering
words: “Through the goodness, mercy and truth which has not been
taken away from one highly undeserving, I am again permitted
the privilege of herewith inclosing a draft to your order for
the general use of the A. M. A., for $1,000. Whether now in my
eightieth year, I shall be permitted to repeat the pleasant
offerings, I know not. Shall I note the fact that coming from no
large store, I cannot see that they diminish it?”

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

Mr. Robert L. Stuart has pledged $150,000 to Princeton College.

Lincoln University is to receive $10,000 from the estate of the
late David B. Small, of York, Pa.

Gen. A. G. P. Dodge has contributed $3,000 to be used in building
an academy at Jackson, Ky.

The late William Ward of Brixton Hill left $100,000 to the
Corporation of London for the establishment and maintenance of a
high school for girls.

Mr. C. F. McCay, formerly a professor in the University of Georgia,
has given that institution $20,000 in Georgia Railroad 6-per-cent
bonds.

Sarah A. and Emily B. Sumner, of Albany, N.Y., have given $2,500
each for an endowment fund for Rutgers College.

The Northwestern University at Evanston has received $25,000 from
ex-Gov. Evans of Colorado.

Ex President Wright, of the Northern Pacific Railroad, has given
$100,000 for the establishment of a boys’ and girls’ college at
Tacoma, W.T.

Carlton College, Northfield, Minn., has recently received $12,000
from Edward H. Williams, Esq., of Philadelphia, for Williams Hall,
built in memory of his only son.

Mrs. Lucy E. Tuttle, of Guilford, Conn., has given $10,000 to the
Olivet College Library Fund as a memorial of her gifted son, Willie
Sage Tuttle.

Buchtel College, Akron, Ohio, has received $25,000 from Mrs. Lydia
Messenger, making $56,000 in all donated by her for the benefit of
the institution.

_Christian intelligence is the most potent agency for obliterating
the barbarism of caste prejudice; and the endowment of schools for
those who suffer from it, the most safe and certain means for its
overthrow._

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


AFRICA.

—The French Romanists have abandoned the country of Uganda.

—It is reported that King Leopold II. of Belgium, with no selfish
or personal object, with no view of gaining territory or commercial
profits, and with no other motive than the highest and purest
philanthropy, is spending $400,000 a year from his own private
purse for the benefit of Africa.

—A hydrographical expedition has been made to the coast of the
Maroc by Capt. Kerhallet and Mr. Dumoulin.

—The project relative to placing a submarine telegraphic cable
between the Island of Teneriffe and St. Louis on the Senegal has
been voted by the French Chamber.

—The Italian mission directed by Bianchi has safely arrived at
Samera, where they found the King of Abyssinia, to whom they gave
presents from the King of Italy.

Monseigneur Lasserre, coadjutor of the Apostolic Vicar of the
Gauls, has obtained from Menelik the authorization to establish
himself among the Ittous Gauls, who have submitted to him.

—Under the title of the French Factories of the Persian Gulf and
of Eastern Africa, a society has been formed for French oriental
commerce, of importation and exportation.

—The native chief Ghowe having committed incursions upon the
territory of Sherbro near Sierra Leone, Major Talbot has burned
the village of Kwatamaha, massacred the inhabitants of Kahun and
pillaged and burnt Jalliah.

—Some friends of the French mission at the Senegal have brought to
France three young negroes, who will be raised in the agricultural
colony of Sainte Foy, and prepared to return to St. Louis as
shoemakers, tailors, cooks, perhaps even teachers and evangelists.

—Upon the demand of many chiefs of the Slave Coast, a protectorate
of France has been established upon the territories of Petit-Popo,
Grand-Popo and Porto-Seguro between the English possessions of the
Gold Coast and Whydah, beyond which is the territory of Porto-Novo
upon which the French protectorate is already recognized.

—Major Machado, who has been at Lisbon to confer with the
Portuguese government on the subject of the railroad from Delagoa
Bay to Pretoria, has started for the Transvaal to complete the
track of the section from Incomati to Pretoria. A society has been
founded at Lisbon to ask the concession of this line.

[Illustration: A MARAUDING PARTY IN AFRICA.]


THE INDIANS.

—The Spirit of Missions urges the establishment of a Protestant
Episcopal Mission in Alaska, and the sending out of a Bishop from
the United States with a score of faithful priests and deacons to
second his efforts.

—A missionary laboring in the Indian Territory reports to
the Sunday-school of the Collegiate Church, New York, that a
Sunday-school which he organized eight years ago has grown to be a
church of seventy members. In one of the Indian families he found a
grand piano.

—Some years ago the pride of the Cheyenne and Arapahoe schools in
the Indian Territory, was their school herd of several hundred
cattle, which had been accumulated through a number of years’
effort, without material expense to the government. This furnished
employment and prospective income for the school boys. At its most
successful period it was destroyed by an order from the Department
at Washington, directing that the cattle be distributed among
the Indians. After being without the herd for several years the
Department has now started a new one, by purchasing 600 cows and
heifers and placing them again under the care of the Indian school
boys.


THE CHINESE.

—Not one in five hundred of the women of Shantung can read.

—There are twenty self-supporting Protestant churches in China, and
nearly 400 which are partially so.

—A Chinaman in a town called New-Bendigo, in Australia, where there
is a large Chinese colony, was asked recently what practical good
had been accomplished by the missionaries. He answered as follows:
Before, no one understood God’s Word. Good many work Sunday all
same as week day. Now, no work done on Sunday at New-Bendigo by
my countrymen. Perhaps chop little wood for house, or wash him
clothes; but no go work. No matter poor, every one no work on
Sunday. Before, all worship idols. Now, many come to church; he no
worship idols. When Lee Wah begin to read, good many had idols in
house; thirty more. Myself had one. Now, only ten houses and stores
in New-Bendigo with idols in them. Before, at old township, good
many Chinese steal fowls, everything. Now, no more steal; every one
work; go get job. Before, every night, Chinaman learn to practice
fight. I tell him too stupid fellow. You learn God’s Word you no
want to fight. Now, no more learn to fight. Learn God’s Word.
Before people no care for God’s Word; he no know or care. Now, good
many people like read God’s Word. Before, too much time, nothing to
do. Now, many say I learn to read God’s Word. Now, no more waste
time. I like to read. Before, good many make fun God’s Word; laugh.
Papers were put upon outside of store, make laugh at Christian.
Papers were put up on door of baptized men’s house. Now, heathen
men no more make fun; strong man’s hands tied up. Himself like it
now. Very quiet now.

       *       *       *       *       *


REFLEX INFLUENCE OF A. M. A.

FROM ADDRESS BY REV. S. L. BLAKE, D.D.

The direct increase to the wealth of the country, in diminishing
the number of mere consumers, and increasing the number of actual
producers and property-holders, puts the business world largely in
debt to this society.

A few figures will help your understanding of the case. In
twenty-one years this society has spent $5,543,636.03—a yearly
average of $263,772.19. In seventeen years, from 1863 to 1880,
from not owning a single dollar’s worth of property of any sort
available for taxation, these people have come to hold property
taxed for $100,000,000, as appears from Southern tax-bills, which
show no respect of color—an average rate of increase from nothing,
of $5,882,352.94 a year. This is a yearly increase greater than
the whole amount spent by this society. That is, this society has
spent $1, and these people, from absolute pauperism, have come into
possession of over $21 of taxable property. These facts answer the
question whether the colored man can take care of himself, and show
that the labors of this society have a cash value which can easily
be computed.

There is still another phase of the cash value of the labors of
this society, as related to the productive wealth of the country.
Here this society touches and increases our material prosperity.
I refer to a more equable distribution of ownership in the soil.
Surely no one can deny that to change five or six millions of
people from paupers to property-holders, produces a very material
effect upon the prosperity of the State.

I believe that it is a settled canon of political economy that
a nation’s wealth is in its soil. Where there are but few
land-owners, and the tillers of the soil are tenants, wealth must
be in the hands of the few, and comparative if not absolute poverty
in the hands of the many. To this state of things belong social
classes, as widely separated from each other as continents. It
goes without saying that landed monopoly and general prosperity
of the people do not go together. I am no advocate of communism;
but I take the ground, and I believe it can be held, that the same
amount of property, somewhat evenly distributed among the people of
a country, adds more to its actual productive wealth and material
prosperity, than the same amount of money would do, held in the
hands of a few, who constitute an aristocracy of wealth and of
blood. Of course, in every state, some men must be vastly more
wealthy than others. But a comfortable competence in one’s hands
makes him entirely independent of his more wealthy neighbor.

It is among the proofs of the increasing material prosperity of
this country, that the average size of farms has decreased from
199 acres in 1860 to 134 acres in 1880; and that the amount of
capital invested in farms exceeds the money invested in railroads,
and in manufacturing, including supplies, by over $2,000,000,000.
Gradually this vast preponderance of wealth is being more equably
distributed among the people. The plantation system, previous to
the war, gives way to the small farm, tilled and owned in many
cases by the former slaves. Take a single case. Liberty County,
Georgia, in 1860, was mostly taken up by large plantations. There
were but 48 farms, “of from three acres to one hundred acres each.”
In 1880 the county was almost entirely owned by colored people, and
there were 1,500 farms. This is an illustration of the yielding of
landed monopoly and aristocracy to popular ownership in the soil,
and to a more general and evenly diffused prosperity. The average
size of farms in fifteen slave States has been reduced from over
368 acres in 1860 to a trifle over 149 acres in 1880, over 50 per
cent. If you precipitate upon the population of a country 1,000,000
citizens, who may become land-holders, you have struck a heavy blow
at landed monopoly, and taken a long stride toward increase of
material prosperity.

Let me give you two or three further facts. In 1878 the freedmen
of Prince Edward County, Virginia, owned 2,305 acres of land,
an increase in eight years of 1,847 acres. In the county of
Rockbridge, Virginia, two thousand blacks were assessed for $50,000
worth of real estate. In 1876 the colored people of Georgia owned
land valued at $1,234,104, and other property to swell the total
to $6,134,829. In the single State of Georgia these people, from
not owning a dollar, have come to possess property greater in value
than the entire sum spent by this Association in 21 years. Who says
that this alabaster box of ointment has been wasted?

Material prosperity indicates a certain degree of intelligence. The
ignorant are not the wealthy nations of the globe. The work of this
Association in bringing these people up to a degree of intelligence
somewhat commensurate with their opportunities, and in lifting
them to a level of citizenship co-ordinate with the welfare and
prosperity of the State, has directly aided in this increase of the
material forces of the nation’s welfare. For if the actual amount
of property were not increased, yet the prospective wealth of the
nation must be by converting 6,000,000 illiterate paupers into
educated, independent property-holders.

I find this in the last issue of the _American Missionary_, which
supports my position with high authority: “It has been estimated
at Washington that the annual profit to the country by the
conversion of illiterate into educated labor cannot be less than
$400,000,000.” This work has been done by this Association.

Money given to the endowment of its institutions at the South would
yield a hundred fold in half a generation.

[Illustration: WHITE TOP MOUNTAIN, VIRGINIA.]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SOUTH.

REV. JOSEPH E. ROY, D.D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT.

PROF. ALBERT SALISBURY, SUPERINTENDENT OF EDUCATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES OF AN EDUCATIONAL TOUR IN LOUISIANA AND MISSISSIPPI.

PRES. W. S. ALEXANDER, D.D.

An experiment in the form of a brief educational campaign in
Louisiana and Mississippi has been attended with the most
gratifying results, and has been to those identified with it a
revelation of what may be accomplished in the same direction.
Hitherto in our educational work in Louisiana we have depended, so
far as the patronage of the country parishes was concerned, upon
the good reports of the students, and the dawning conception, in
the minds of those living remote from the city, of the necessity
of an education. It occurred to Prof. Hitchcock and myself, as
we were likely to be detained in New Orleans the greater part of
the summer, that we could in no way better serve the interests
of Straight University than by presenting the facts of education
directly to the people, and pleading its claims wherever there
was “an open door.” We not only found doors wide open, but were
greeted from many parishes with the Macedonian cry, “Come over and
help us.” Our University was represented in the most important
centers, either by our graduates or those still upon our roll.
They had borne to their homes a grateful sense of good received at
the school, and entered enthusiastically into the matter of the
meetings. They were our _avant-couriers_, and most faithfully did
they spread the tidings of our coming.

In the space of a single article we can do little more than
summarize, but we trust our enforced conciseness will not despoil
the narrative of its interest or value. The first important point
made was


_Baton Rouge._

The meeting on July 5 at the Capital of the State had been well
advertised, and was largely attended. The A. M. E. Church (Rev.
Mr. Jackson, pastor) was well filled. The majority of the audience
were young men, just the class we desired to reach. We had not
only a respectful, but an interested hearing. Mr. A. H. Colwell,
a talented graduate of Straight, who fills an important position
as teacher at Baton Rouge, presided at the organ, and at the
conclusion of the meeting made a neat address, moving a resolution
of thanks to the speakers. Rev. Mr. Jackson spoke with feeling and
intelligent appreciation of the demands of education. The ablest
white lawyer in Baton Rouge made a rousing speech, commending
heartily the objects of the meeting.


_Vicksburg._

The meeting at this point, July 9th, presents many facts worthy
of record. Our young men, Reynolds and Temple, graduates of the
present year, had been untiring in their efforts to make the
meeting a success. Every newspaper in Vicksburg had noticed it
editorially. Every colored pulpit had twice and thrice advertised
it, and urged the people to attend. Influential white people
had been invited, especially members of the School Board. The
Court-House had been applied for, and freely granted by the City
Council for the purposes of the meeting. On the day previous
(Sunday) it was my privilege to preach in two of the most important
colored churches of the city, while Prof. Hitchcock did good work
in the Sunday-Schools. On Sabbath evening I preached in the A.
M. E. Church (Rev. Mr. Carolina, pastor) to an audience of 800
people. It was a rare privilege, and great was the joy of preaching
on the blessed religion of the Lord Jesus to so many people,
and all eager and reverent in their attention. On Monday night
the Court-House an imposing building situated on “the heights,”
overlooking the city, and the first object that attracts attention
as the boat enters the harbor, witnessed the gathering of an eager
and crowded assembly of men and women, roused to no common degree
of enthusiasm by the simple announcement of an “_educational
meeting_.”

The Court-Room, with the wide halls approaching it and the deep
window recesses, was not large enough to accommodate the hundreds
who flocked to it. It was estimated that 800 entered and as many
more failed to get in. An organ had been brought from one of the
churches, a fine choir had been gathered, and very choice music was
rendered. The leading colored clergymen of the city were present.
The addresses which were made were plain matter-of-fact statements
of the nature and demands of education, the widespread illiteracy
of the colored people, the opportunity offered them of improving
their condition mentally, socially, materially and morally, and
the utter impossibility of their ever reaching a higher place in
any department of growth without the guiding and helping hand of
education. Great plainness of speech was used, and was not only
tolerated but approved by the audience.

_Rev. C. K. Marshall, D.D._, the author of the vigorous and able
pamphlet entitled “The Colored Race Weighed in the Balance,” a
gentleman of great influence in Mississippi, kindly called upon us
at the hotel, and not only was present at the meeting, but made
an eloquent and telling address, replete with good points. He has
always been a friend of the colored race, and they do not forget
it now. Rev. Dr. Woodworth, of the M. E. Church South, and Hon.
Mr. Chamberlin. President of the School Board, were also present,
and spoke kindly words of approval of the objects of the meeting.
The leading paper of Vicksburg devoted a column and a half to a
favorable account of the proceedings. An old colored man, whom I
saw violently gesticulating as I was going down Court-House Hill,
said, “That meeting was worth one million dollars to our people.”
God grant it may be so.


_Plaquemine._

The crowning meeting of the campaign was in the town of
_Plaquemine, Parish of Iberville_, on Saturday night, July 28th.

_Hon. T. T. Allain_, one of the most enterprising colored men in
the South, and one of the most consistent friends of education,
took the meeting in hand at the start, and spared neither time nor
money to bring it to the notice of the whole people. This meeting,
in all its appointments, was so unusual that I shall be pardoned
if I describe it quite minutely. We were met by a committee of
reception at the depot, and escorted to the hotel. One hour in
advance of the meeting, a large cannon, planted in the court-house
yard, made a tremendous salute, causing the very village to
tremble. Peal after peal went forth, each seeming louder than the
last. Torches were lighted and planted thickly in the court-yard,
which, by their glare and smoke, gave a weird look to the hundreds
of dusky faces gathering around them. A large brass band, with a
full complement of pieces, added to the novelty and effectiveness
of the scene.

Think of it, dear friends! This was not a political meeting. It was
not a barbecue. It was simply a meeting called in the interests of
education among the colored people of Southern Louisiana, which has
always been regarded a “_pretty dark strip of woods_.” Well, now
for the meeting itself! Mr. Allain gracefully and ably presided,
and made a speech which did credit to his head and heart. For two
hours that densely packed assembly listened to Prof. Hitchcock
and myself with unflagging interest, manifested by frequent
applause. The Court-House and court-yard were filled, and our
audience without and within the building gave us a respectful and
appreciative hearing. Plaquemine has been called the “banner” town.
_We_ certainly have no desire to dispute her claim to the honorable
distinction, for the treatment we received there was “_royal_.”

The meeting at _Donaldsonville_, July 12th, was a union of the
Baptist and Methodist congregations, and will result, we trust,
in the awakening of a new interest. I should be glad to speak
particularly, had I not reached the limit of my space, of meetings
held by Prof. Hitchcock at West Baton Rouge, St. Sophie, New Texas
and Beauregour, and visits to Monticello, Darrowville, and Point
a la Hache, where many of the families and homes of the students
were seen. Everywhere he was awarded a warm welcome. People rallied
to the meetings, sometimes from a distance of 12 miles. Genuine
enthusiasm was aroused, and the tide of public sentiment has been
turned, we believe, more strongly toward the “_School-House_,” and
that was our only object. The “door of opportunity” is fairly open.
Ought we not to enter it and tell the entire people the glad story
of education?

       *       *       *       *       *


A WORD FROM TILLOTSON INSTITUTE.

PRES. W. E. BROOKS, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

It is due the many donors and friends of Tillotson that a brief
report of the work of the past year be made. It is a pleasure to do
this, both because due and because of the hopeful prosperity which
has attended the institution.

The land upon which to place the new dormitory and the buildings
for the mechanical department, when funds shall be secured, has
been bought at a cost of $5,000—$1,250 of which was from the Hon.
J. H. Raymond, of Austin. Some progress has also been made in
obtaining subscriptions for the new hall, which is imperatively
needed to meet the pressing demands which are made upon us from all
parts of the State. How urgent this call is may be inferred from
the fact that on the 2d day of last October, one day before the
opening of the school, Allen Hall was full to repletion, and the
work of turning away began, and continued throughout the year, so
that it is safe to say that for every one received one was refused.
We had one hundred in our boarding department during the year.
This necessitated placing four students in the larger rooms, and
three in nearly every other—too many by far, but there seemed to be
no other way. They begged to be received, while the two or three
already in the room, urging us to admit one more, made it difficult
to refuse. Put yourself, dear reader, in our place, and you will
appreciate our condition, and why we allowed this crowding process.
It was the best that could be done under the circumstances. Besides
the one hundred in the boarding department, we had ninety-one day
pupils, making our total attendance during the year 191. We have
no primary department. Our numbers would have been very greatly
increased if we had had the room to store them.

In educational and religious results the past year has been
our best. More and better work has been done. The training has
been more thorough and systematic, and the real progress more
satisfactory. This was to be expected. Each year increases largely
our own knowledge of the work and how best to do it.

Our religious services have been more largely attended and richer
in results. A goodly number found Christ, and gave clear evidence
of a change of heart. One in particular, who had been intemperate
and profane to a sad degree, underwent a complete transformation.
Our Sunday school was well attended, drawing in quite a number from
the outside, while our prayer meetings, on Sunday and Thursday
evenings, were pleasant and profitable.

The temperance society, with a pledge prohibiting the use of both
rum and tobacco, embraced nearly every student of the institution.
They gave evidence that they had joined for life. Many of them are
doing good work in this direction, in the schools where they are
now engaged in teaching. We have reason to feel deeply grateful for
the advancement along the whole line of our threefold yet one work.

Our closing exercises won the praise of the many who were present.
Among these were Gov. Ireland, ex-Gov. E. M. Pease, Hon. Mr. Swain,
Comptroller of State, Judge Delaney of the Court of Appeals, Prof.
Hogg, at the head of the schools of Fort Worth, and many other
prominent citizens of Austin.

Able addresses were made by all of the above gentlemen and others;
but among them all none was more cordial and appreciative than that
of Gov. Ireland. He urged the students to continue to press onward
and upward, assuring them that the hour was close at hand when
merit will determine every man’s position, and not the color of his
skin. All, including those named, expressed themselves surprised
and pleased at what they saw and heard. It was the brightest day in
our history.

This brief summary of the work of the past year indicates, but
cannot fully unfold, our need of more room. Young men and women
in the same building is an unfortunate necessity. It is the best
and only thing that can be done with safety to the work, and even
this is full of danger. Then to be forced to refuse admittance
to so many is unpleasant. We ought to keep the streams flowing
toward us, and not turn them in other directions or cause them to
cease flowing altogether. As our only institution in the great
Empire State we ought to provide liberally for it, that it may
carry forward the work so auspiciously begun. No field can be more
inviting. Nowhere in all the South is there a more Catholic spirit.
Everything conspires to insure large returns on all investments
in this department of Christian effort. Are there not friends who
will now come forward and render us needed help in the hour of our
necessity? Twenty thousand dollars in cash or approved pledges and
the new hall will be begun. Some two thousand are already secured.
Monuments of finest brass will perish through the wearing passage
of the ages, but those erected for the uplifting of a race are
imperishable. Will you help erect this?

       *       *       *       *       *


LETTER FROM FLORENCE, ALA.

A person in attendance on revival meetings at this place writes to
Dr. Roy:

“I hasten to tell you what a dear Saviour I have found. I have
accepted Him as mine and I mean to serve and trust Him the rest
of my life. Last Sunday the 20th year to a day since my marriage,
I resolved to be a Christian, but thought I would wait till the
middle of the week before starting. On last evening (Monday) I
drove my team down to the boat for passengers, but on finding that
I would probably have to carry them back and hence be kept from the
meeting, I drove away and attended church. When the invitation was
given I could wait no longer; went forward, gave my heart to Jesus,
and to-day I am a new man, not ashamed to tell the world. I was so
glad that I wish others could this afternoon in the praise meeting
speak for my Saviour, whose pleadings I have so long withstood. I
wanted to write you these words, because I knew you were anxious
for my salvation. How glad have I been always to meet you. No man
would I rather see or hear talk than you. You have caused me to
shed many a tear, but you didn’t know it. Oh I am so glad that
the Lord spared me that I might return to Him. I mean to give the
balance of my days to the blessed master. Shall do all I can to
have others come to Him and live for Him; pray for me that I may be
strong and useful. The Evangelist and his good wife are truly sent
out by the Lord.

“Bro. Brown and they work nicely together. We just seem to be
in a good way. No doubt many will be converted. Up to this time
twelve have been brought out into the light. The Christians are
strengthened, the church encouraged and a good feeling prevails
among the people.”

       *       *       *       *       *


LETTER FROM McINTOSH, Ga.

FROM REV. FLOYD SNELSON.

Our school work has been vigilantly prosecuted this year, somewhat
to the end that the great demand which is made upon us for persons
to teach the public schools in this and adjoining counties might be
met. We have twenty-eight students licensed and sent out to work
this year, who have received all or a part of their training in our
school. Still a great many more are wanted. I have appeals before
me now for teachers for seven schools, made up and ready to begin
at any time, that I cannot supply. I do hope to see the day when
some lover of humanity will aid us with the facilities of a regular
boarding-school here, that this great need of teachers in the
common schools may be met. The twenty-eight that have gone out this
year to teach are allowed from 20 to 40 pupils. With an average of
30 in each of their schools, they will be able to start a light in
the dark minds of 840 needy ones.

Our church work, I am very thankful to say, has also received an
additional Divine recognition. At our last communion season, which
was held July 22, sixteen persons, hopefully converted, came into
the fellowship of the church, and six children were brought to be
baptized.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

—An effort is being made by Rev. Mr. Roberts, of Paris, Texas, to
organize a church at Dood City, where he has been holding special
meetings.

—A new house of worship has been dedicated at Belle Place, La. Rev.
Wm. Butler, pastor, was assisted by Rev. W. R. Polk, of New Iberia,
in the dedicatory services. The A. M. A. furnished a portion of the
funds for the building.

—Rev. B. F. Foster, who labored the past year as pastor and
teacher at Fayetteville, Ark., will prosecute his studies at the
Theological Seminary, Chicago. Rev. John M. Shippen, a recent
graduate of the Theological Department of Howard University, has
accepted an invitation to occupy the place vacated by Mr. Foster.

—Rev. George W. Moore, a graduate of Fisk University and Oberlin
Theological Seminary, has assumed the pastoral care of the Lincoln
Memorial Church, Washington, D.C., under favorable auspices. He is
to supply Dr. Rankin’s pulpit one Sunday.

—Rev. Zechariah Simmons, a licentiate of the North Carolina
Association, has been appointed to take charge of the mission
at Woodbridge, N.C., with reference to the organization of a
church. The A. M. A. has recently purchased a parsonage for his
accommodation.

—The church in Oaks, Alamance Co., N.C., is building a comfortable
house of worship under the supervision of Rev. J. N. Ray, its
pastor, who has received $100 from the A. M. A. for the furtherance
of the enterprise. Miss E. W. Douglass, an experienced missionary
teacher, has been appointed to labor at this point.

—Mr. G. W. Jackson and his wife (Rose McCutcheon) are pushing their
mission day and Sunday-school work at Whiteside, Tenn. They have
been visited by Rev. Jos. E. Smith and Mrs. Steele of Chattanooga,
and meetings of much promise have been held.

—The _Clarion_, of Jackson, Miss., gives an interesting report
of the colored Congregational Church, organized by the A. M. A.
in that city, with Rev. C. L. Harris, pastor. The church has a
membership of 16 and a Sabbath-school of 63. Services are held in
the hall of the Hope Fire Company. The citizens of Jackson have
subscribed liberally toward the erection of a house of worship.

—Rev. S. N. Brown, while furnishing a vacation supply at Florence,
Ala., has been assisted by the evangelist, Rev. J. E. Fields, in a
series of revival meetings, which has resulted in an addition of
twenty members to the church. This is the church which was so much
depleted by the Exodus.

—Rev. A. W. Curtis, of Marion, Ala., on invitation of Rev. Dr.
Raymond, pastor of the Presbyterian Church, has preached on
exchange with him. This is said to be the first expression of
fellowship of this kind the A. M. A. preachers have received at the
South. Mr. Curtis has also accepted an invitation to exchange with
the pastor of the Methodist Episcopal Church South in the same city.

—Rev. Geo. W. Clark of Athens, Ga., and his people, with aid from
the A. M. A., have purchased a lot and are proceeding to build a
house of worship. Up to this time they have held their services in
the chapel of Knox Institute.

—The A. M. A. is building a church at Pekin, N.C., with
accommodations for school purposes.

—The church at Chattanooga, Tenn. (Rev. Jos. E. Smith, pastor),
have built a new fence about the meeting house, which has been
painted outside and inside and beautifully frescoed.

—The St. Louis _Globe-Democrat_ says, in connection with the Press
Convention: “One remarkable paper was that represented at the
Convention by its business manager, R. C. Edmondson. It was _The
Fisk Herald_, a college paper published at the Fisk University
in Nashville, Tenn.; in fact, the only college paper the colored
people have. It is a nice eight-page tinted paper, well printed
and generally well reading journal.” The _Daily World_ says: “The
present number is of neat typographical appearance, and is filled
with interesting reading matter. A liberal encouragement should be
extended to this enterprise.”

—The President of the Produce Exchange, Wilmington, N.C., speaking
of the school of the A. M. A., says: “The boys, after leaving
the institution, get employment more readily than others, because
their moral principles are higher, and because they are generally
better fitted for intelligent occupation than the majority of those
who profess to have received an elementary education. The people
of Wilmington have great cause for thankfulness that our Negro
population is so law-abiding and faithful to duty; and to take
courage from the results already accomplished in a transition so
violent from a life of slavery to that of freedom and citizenship
in the eyes of the law. The utmost harmony has prevailed between
the races for many years past, and instances of disagreement
between employers and employed are far more rare than among the
whites in the North.”

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


RECRUITS FOR THE SOUTH CHINA MISSION.

REV. W. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

I trust that our friends do not forget how God has begun to fulfil
the prayer which the motto of our mission, “China for Christ,”
and the hearts of our Chinese Christians sent up during so many
years, in the establishment by the American Board of a Mission in
China to co-operate with ours, and to reach, first of all, the
swarming millions in those districts from which our immigrants
have come. In connection with the departure of Bro. Hager to this
field, our Congregational Association of Christian Chinese gave
$500 in cash, and one of its best members and my best helpers as a
co-laborer. Bro. Hager has established his head-quarters at Hong
Kong and has gathered there a school similar in all respects to
ours in California. But this is only a rendezvous. The main work
is elsewhere, preaching the gospel and scattering the word of life
on the main land. Lee Sam is busy with this already; enduring
hardness as a good soldier, and working almost alone. But he will
not be suffered to work long alone. Our helper for years past at
Sacramento, Lem Chung, sailed for China more than six weeks ago,
and has already, we hope been welcomed at Hong Kong. Sustaining for
years a relation to the Chinese of Sacramento every way equivalent
to that which an American pastor sustains in the community where
he labors, he so commended himself by his mental capacity, his
faithfulness, his Christian spirit and consistent walk that while
our Chinese brethren clung to him as few American churches do to
their pastors, he was also “of good report,” or, as the revision
reads it, “has good testimony from them that are without,” both
Chinese and Americans. Whether he will remain permanently in China
is not decided, but so long as he does remain, I doubt not he will
be ready for every good word and work. And now three others among
our helpers, Hong Sing of Santa Cruz, Wong Him Wong of Stockton
and Lou Quong of the West School in this city, are making ready to
depart. They go together. They hope to begin missionary work on
the steamer. They hope to continue it when they reach their native
land. We shall miss them greatly. They have approved themselves
in our service, workmen that needed not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of truth and illustrating its power in their
consistent lives. But with reference to our great purpose, “China
for Christ,” our loss is a gain, and we gladly take others to fill
the vacant places, hoping that these too, trained to preach by
preaching and to teach by teaching, will follow their brethren to
the dark regions across the wide sea.

At the time of this writing, a fortnight remains before the close
of our fiscal year. Toward the $12,500 which our work for the year
_must_ cost, we have received in cash and pledges $11,800. To find
$700 more within these two weeks seems to be quite impossible,
by virtue of any resources remaining within the superintendent’s
reach. He repeats over to himself: “My God shall supply all your
need;” he recounts to himself the many mercies past; and how, again
and again, in his own experience, what seemed impossible has come
to pass, and still he questions and he doubts, and asking, seeking,
knocking, can do no better than to cry, “Lord I believe, help thou
mine unbelief.” Before this reaches the eye of our readers, the
fiscal year will have closed, and the account will be made up: yet
_not so closed_ but that if any of our readers are willing to share
with me the load which open doors and proffered harvests have laid
upon me, their help would be most welcome and most _timely_.

       *       *       *       *       *




BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

MISS D. E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

       *       *       *       *       *


MEETING OF BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

In connection with the Annual Meeting of the A. M. A. in Brooklyn,
notice of which is given elsewhere, there will be a Woman’s Meeting
in the interest of our Bureau of Woman’s Work. Report of mission
work among the Chinese on the Pacific Coast will be made by Mrs.
W. C. Pond, wife of Superintendent Pond; on Indian Missions, by
Mrs Alfred L. Riggs, wife of the Principal of our Santee School,
Nebraska; on work among the mountain whites of Kentucky, by Mrs. A.
A. Myers, wife of Rev. Mr. Myers, our missionary in that region;
on work among the colored people, by Miss Anna M. Cahill, late
Principal of Normal Department, Fisk University. Other ladies will
participate in the meeting, particulars concerning which, and also
as to the hour of the meeting, will be given in the religious press
at a later date.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE PAPER MISSION, AND WHAT CAME OF IT.

BY MISS NANCY MARSH, PROVIDENCE, R.I.

Since we commenced our mission, May, 1880, we have received many
letters asking “What can I do?” To such we have made various
suggestions.

In Stoneham, Mass., the ladies felt they could not send boxes, but
wished to do something, so organized the “Stevens Home Missionary
Society,” and have sent to various places 779 papers and pamphlets,
and 7 Sunday-school books. They have basted 1,465 blocks of
patch-work and sent to seven teachers in Texas, Tennessee, Georgia,
North Carolina and Ladies Island; have basted also 49 handkerchiefs
“from pieces of cloth, to teach the children to sew, and give them
what they needed.” Postage $5.22. They have also corresponded with
several pastors and teachers. The Secretary says; “I am delighted
with some of the correspondence, and enjoy the work very much; am
so glad to help even a little in this good work. I love some of the
dear teachers very much, and it has all come through their dear
letters, heart touching heart, and all for Jesus. Thank you for all
the interest you have taken to help us get started, and for your
aid right along; we have had no names except what you have given
us.” This society has proved very efficient, and they have been so
grateful for the privilege of working, it has been a pleasure to
find them opportunities; it has done them good as well as others.
Some of these letters have been read in their missionary concerts,
and awakened an increasing interest in the community.

A lady in Chesterfield, Ill., formerly a teacher in Utah, and some
young friends have basted 300 blocks of patch-work for teachers in
Arkansas, North Carolina and Tennessee, feeling, she says, “that
our greatest privilege is to work for the Lord.”

A letter came to us from Middleboro, Mass., saying, “I am very
anxious to do something for the missionaries, and, as I am an
invalid, and unable to give money, I thought I could cut and baste
patch-work if nothing more.” Recently we received a card stating
“I have sent 600 blocks to Chattanooga, Tenn., I would be glad to
do more, but am now unable to do any kind of work, but hope to
sometime, if ever so little.” In answer to inquiries, this lady
says: “The work I sent Mrs. S—— I did lying on my reclining chair
nearly as flat as a bed; but have been confined to my bed many
weeks at a time, and suffering more than words can tell.” Surely
this service performed for the Master, in such weariness and pain,
shall not lose its reward.

From Claremont, N.H., the question came: “What can a mission circle
do for Christmas?” We suggested a place as affording ample scope
for their ingenuity and generosity; so “the Sunbeams” (the mission
circle) 25 in number, from six to fourteen years, sent rays of
light and gladness to cheer the hearts of these desolate people
in the shape of picture-frames, book-marks, work and scrap-bags,
mittens, pin-balls, spectacle-cases for the old ladies, etc. The
ladies of this place also sent a box of second-hand clothing, which
was greatly needed.

There has been much labor in corresponding with so many persons:
69 letters and postals have been written. This includes work only
among the Freedmen, yet we have rejoiced in the interest awakened
in various places by this means, and are glad to help this good
cause in every way in our power. Aid has been given in various ways
and different places, which, including postage, makes $37.24. This
_patch-work_ has become quite an institution, 2,504 blocks have
been sent, greatly helping the teachers in their work, saving their
time and strength, and helping to form habits of industry which
are so essential to the well-being of these women and young girls,
thus fitting them for usefulness in the future. One old lady, who
is much interested in the young, and fond of patch-work, gave us
78 blocks very nicely basted, which were sent to Ladies Island,
so meeting the needs of a young girl whose quilt had come to a
standstill for want of materials.

In 1882, in order to enlarge our field of operations, we sent
to Dr. Strieby for new names of pastors and teachers among the
Freedmen, and are now able to report that we have forwarded to the
Southern States 1,021 papers and pamphlets, 339 lesson papers,
122 tracts, 74 Scripture cards and 103 Christmas cards; postage
$5.72. Besides these, papers have been sent by several persons
in different States. A teacher in Texas writes, “I should like
Sunday-school papers, temperance, and other tracts, to distribute
as I visit among the people.” “Can make use of the patch-work
and any other sewing prepared; thanks for encouraging words, and
sympathy, we need your constant and earnest prayers.”

From N.C.—“Your Christmas cards reached us safely; the children
enjoyed their gifts, and received them gratefully. My field is not
an easy one, but I am endeavoring with the Master’s help to plant
and replant fruitful seed. Any good reading matter is acceptable.
I need material for my sewing school (one dozen spools of cotton
and six crochet needles, were sent to this school by two young
ladies). Your letter was full of encouragement and good advice,
and strengthened me much. My work is chiefly among the children,
have 50 or 60 in Sunday-school in the morning, and about the same
number attend the Band of Hope every Sabbath afternoon. We have
prayer-meetings every Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday evenings. I
have also a Bible-class for adults, which I teach an hour and a
half every Wednesday evening. Have received the patch-work from
Mrs. M., it is indeed a great help to have it basted, my time is so
occupied.”

Ga.—The teacher writes: “Thanks for your interest in us, we pay
for our Sunday school papers, for we think the people prize them
more when they pay for them; but I can send what I receive into
the country, where they are very glad of them; sent your roll last
night out twenty-five miles to a place where they have nothing to
help them; have several places to which I can send, and profitably
use all I receive. We are trying to give the people a little
instruction in mission work; and take up a collection once in three
months; this people need nothing more than to understand that there
are others as poor as themselves, and they certainly are very poor,
but, as they receive, they must also give; true growth comes from
looking out. Our day school has over 100, and our Sunday school
nearly as many more, some coming four or five miles, and have been
very enthusiastic in their work. My scholars are looking forward to
teaching. Last summer 14 were out, and more will probably go this
summer. We are hoping to give them better ideas of religion, that
they may help to change the character of the coming generation. We
have organized a “Woman’s Missionary Society.” They are to meet
from house to house, taking their supper with them; think it will
go far toward making them better housekeepers, as well as teaching
them to make things, which they will sell, and so get a little
money into their treasury, then they can send a dollar to some
cause in which they are interested. Pray for the success of this
society for through it, I hope to reach the homes, and there is so
much to be done in the homes before there can be much improvement.”

We have had cheering words from pastors in Arkansas and Kentucky,
telling of souls converted, Christians revived and children
gathered into Sunday schools. Our papers have been given where
there is great destitution of reading matter.

At Christmas a few cards and papers were sent to a pastor in
Childersburg, Ala. He writes: “I want to thank your class for
their gifts to the children, who are destitute of such things. Our
church was burned a year ago, after a temperance lecture, but the
people are building better than before. We held services in our
church last winter without a stove, and the house all open, yet we
trust the Lord was with us; our school numbered 30 or 40 during the
cold weather and a larger number when pleasant. There are many who
cannot read, and many who can have no Bibles.”

We have been much interested in these pastors and teachers, some
of them have made great sacrifices, and though not appreciated by
those who should sustain and encourage them, future generations
will rise up and call them blessed. We are very grateful to all the
kind friends who have helped us in our work by papers, postage,
patch-work, and in various ways and places, especially for the
Christian sympathy extended to these pastors and teachers. It has
been duly appreciated, and lightened many a burdened heart; so we
trust our “Paper Mission” has not been a failure in the Southern
States.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


A TALK WITH THE CHILDREN.

MISS IDA M. BEACH, SAVANNAH, GA.

“The lady asked me was I agoin’ to hear the children make their
speeches,” said a little colored girl but just transplanted from
her Southern home to this Northern land.

“What do you mean?” I asked.

“Why, it is breakin’ up day in the schoolhouse over yonder, and the
children are goin’ to speak.”

[Illustration:

  _From Harper’s Young People._

TOPSY LEFT ALONE.]

Sitting by my window the next day, voices of children attracted
my attention. Looking up I saw two little ones—a brother and
sister—trudging along followed by another little girl. I noticed
the fresh white dresses and pretty aprons, and that they seemed
to be very much in earnest about something. A half hour later
the mother passed, and it dawned upon me, then, that it was the
“last day of school.” Afterward, riding by the school-house, and
peeping in, I saw rows of bright children and many happy parents
and friends. It brought to my mind another “last day,” where were
children dressed by just as loving hands in their white lawns, and
pink and cream buntings. Their songs were just as well sung—perhaps
better—for a lady, after spending a day in a public school of a New
England city, wrote: “The children are trained by a music teacher
who receives $800 a year, but their singing could not be compared
to that we heard by the pupils of ——,” referring to these of whom
I am telling you. Their little “speeches” were recited just as
distinctly; the teachers were just as proud; the parents just as
happy, nay, happier. I’ll tell you why by and by.

Have you studied U.S. History? And do you remember the story of our
late Civil War? Then you know that one result of it was that nearly
four million slaves, who were owned by other people, to be bought
and sold like any other property, were made free. They could go
where they chose; work as they wanted to; receive the wages they
earned; make homes for themselves, and not be afraid that their
children would be torn away from them to go with another master.

If you should take the cars in Richmond and ride though—what
States?—till you came to Florida, you would pass through miles and
miles of pinelands scattered all along. Set right in among the pine
trees are little log cabins, the homes of many of these people.
Owning little farms, raising their rice and corn, cotton and sweet
potatoes, they seem very happy indeed. I heard snatches of “Hold
the Fort” coming from within one of these cabins, and remembered
seeing a little church not far away, so I think they must have
Sunday-school, and use the “Gospel Hymns,” don’t you?

Stopping over one train in a Southern city, and inquiring for the
homes of the colored people, you will be directed to almost any
lane. Shall I tell you about one I visited?

Clara told me where to find her. Hunting around among many houses
which were nearly alike, I suddenly saw a face at a window which
I knew must be that of Clara’s mother. I crossed the street and
knocked at the door. It was old and weather-beaten, and fairly
creaked as I rapped.

A little old woman, with a white turban bound about her head,
opened the door. With a courtesy and warm greeting she offered
me a chair. The floor was uncarpeted, but as clean as frequent
scrubbings with soap and water could make it.

Two sticks were burning in the open fire-place, before which stood
a half dozen flat-irons. Mrs. —— apologized for “bein’ a ironin’ on
a Saturday,” and after giving a few finishing touches to a piece on
the board sat down to tell me about Clara.

“My husban’ is dead, an’ it is very hard to get an hones’ livin’
an’ keep Clara in school. She ain’t strong, ma’am, Clara ain’t, an’
can’t do much hard work, but she love’ her books an’ want to teach.
She was graduate’ las’ year, but nothing would do but I mus’ sen’
her this year. It is mighty hard to get the money, you know, ma’am,
but I never can give her nothing but an education. I never had none
myself, but, Clara, she is right smart in her books, ma’am. I wants
her to be educated.” The same story oft repeated, “the children,
the children they mus’ be educated.”

Do you know, now, why those mothers were so happy when listening to
the songs and recitations of their children? Can you realize how
proud they are when they find that Nehemiah and Charles Henry can
read and write like any white boys?

Who will hunt up nine others and be one of ten to save ten cents
each month to pay the tuition of one of these children?

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR AUGUST, 1883.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $222.07.

    Bangor. First Cong. Ch., 18.61; Rev. Joseph
      Smith, 10                                              $28.61
    Bluehill. Mrs. E. W. Mayo, 4; Mrs. H. W. J., 1             5.00
    Brewer. First Cong. Ch.                                   12.85
    Brunswick. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 69.60; Marshall
      Cram, 10                                                79.60
    Brunswick. Mrs. John D. Lincoln, _for Selma,
      Ala._                                                    2.00
    Dennysville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           13.02
    Ferry Village. Rev. R. D. Osgood                          10.00
    Gorham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                28.38
    Gorham. Miss E. B. Emery, _for Macon, Ga._                 3.00
    Kennebunk. Union Ch. and Soc.                             21.61
    Limington. Miss A. Boothby                                 4.00
    Waterford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       14.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $234.62.

    Amherst. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  20.00
    Candia Village. Jona. Martin                               5.00
    Derry. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 17.65
    East Jaffrey. Miss Eliza A. Parker                        20.00
    Goffstown. Cong Ch. 37.74, and Sab. Sch.,
      1.55, to const. MRS. HATTIE A. PAIGE L. M.;
      “A Friend,” 30, to const. MISS LUELLA D.
      CARPENTER L. M.                                         69.29
    Hampstead. Miss Ann M. Howard                              5.00
    Hancock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               25.00
    Mount Vernon. Cong Ch. and Soc.                            5.00
    Pembroke. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              52.58
    Rindge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 2.10
    West Concord. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          13.00


  VERMONT, $164.96.

    Barre. Cong. Ch.                                          12.50
    Castleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             31.00
    Jeffersonville. “A Friend.”                               25.00
    Johnson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               15.00
    Ludlow. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 20.47; and Sab.
      Sch., 1.80                                              22.27
    Manchester. Miss Ellen Hawley, _for Foster
      Hall Reading Room, Talladega C._                        20.00
    Pittsford. “D.”                                            1.00
    Post Mill Village. Mrs. C. M. Holbrook                     1.00
    Saint Albans. First Cong. Ch.                             13.05
    Tyson Furnace. ——                                          1.14
    Vergennes. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             20.00
    ——. “Rutland Co.”                                          3.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $2,078.81.

    Amesbury. C. F. Hovey, 10.40; E. P. Elliott, 50c.         10.90
    Amesbury and Salisbury. Union Evan. Ch. and Soc.          17.00
    Amherst. G. C. Munsell                                     2.00
    Barre. Evan. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                          17.00
    Belchertown. Cong. Ch. and Soc., adl.                      0.25
    Blackstone. H. Hodgson                                     1.50
    Boston. “In memory of little Fannie,” 10; Mrs.
      Susan Collin, 1                                         11.00
    Bradford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        40.57
    Brookfield. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., Bbl. of C.,
      _for Fisk U._
    Campello. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              54.27
    Coleraine. Mrs. Prudence Smith                             2.50
    Chicopee. Second Cong. Ch., 32.17; Mrs.
      Henrietta M. Daniels, 10                                42.17
    Falmouth. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        45.00
    Granby. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                80.00
    Haverhill. G. Merrill and wife, 150; Centre
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., 34; Mrs. Mary B. Jones, 10         194.00
    Hopkinton. “Friends”                                       2.00
    Housatonic. Cong. Soc.                                    50.56
    Hubbardston. “A Friend”                                    4.50
    Hyde Park. Heart and Hand Soc. of First Cong.
      Ch., Bundle of Goods, _for Santee Agency, Neb._
    Ipswich. South Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Indian Aid, Hampton N. & A. Inst._                      50.00
    Ipswich. South Cong. Ch. and Soc                          20.00
    Long Meadow. Gent’s Benev. Soc.                           21.60
    Lowell. Rodolphus Stevens                                 15.00
    Lunenburg. “L. L. E. N.,” a Chronometer.
    Mattapoisett. Cong. Ch. & Soc.                            10.00
    Medford. Mystic Ch. and Soc., (30 of which to
      const. REV. THEOPHILUS PARSONS SAWIN L. M.,
      and 30 from D. W. Wilcox to const. MISS EMMA
      JOSEPHINE WILCOX, L. M.)                               122.15
    Middletown. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            12.00
    Millbury. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const.
      SAMUEL N. ROGERS and ALBERT W. LINCOLN, L.
      Ms.                                                     72.35
    Mill River. M. R. Wilcox                                  10.00
    Monson. Cong. Sab. Sch., 20; Mrs. C. O.
      Chapin, 5                                               25.00
    Monterey. Cong. Ch.                                        8.00
    Newburyport. “A Friend”                                    5.00
    Northfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             7.60
    Oxford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          19.97
    Peabody. “A Friend,” to const. MISS SUSANNA
      MILLS, L. M.                                            30.00
    Phillipston. D. & L. Mixter                                2.00
    Randolph. Miss Abbie W. Turner                            10.00
    Reading. “A. H. M. S.”                                     2.50
    Revere. “A Friend,” by Mrs. A. S. Steele, _for
      Orphans from Chattanooga at Tougaloo U._                50.00
    Rockport. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        33.30
    Roxbury. Immanuel Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           30.00
    Shelburne. First Cong. Soc.                               83.76
    South Easton. “A Friend”                                  20.00
    South Hadley Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    25.00
    South Weymouth. Union Ch. and Soc.                        36.64
    Springfield. First Cong. Ch., 23.92; Hope
      Cong. Ch. 39                                            62.92
    Sudbury. U. E. Ch. and Soc.                               20.80
    Sunderland. Cong. Ch and Soc                              40.00
    Sunderland. “M.”                                           2.00
    Wakefield. “Mission Workers,” _for Indian
      girl, Bird’s Nest, Santee Agency_                       30.00
    West Boylston. Polly W. Ames, 3; Geo. W. Ames,
      2.50                                                     5.50
    West Springfield. First Cong. Ch.                         20.00
    Worcester. Hiram Smith and family                         30.00
                                                           --------
                                                          $1,508.31

    LEGACY.

    Milbury. Estate of Asa Hayden, by Harriet W.
      Hayden, Extx.                                          570.50
                                                           --------
                                                          $2,078.81


  RHODE ISLAND, $584.00.

    Central Falls. Cong. Ch                                   63.00
    Little Compton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        21.00
    Providence. Geo. H. Corliss                              500.00


  CONNECTICUT, $3,398.82.

    Berlin. Mrs. C. M. Jarvis, _for Woman’s Work_              5.00
    Bethel. Cong. Ch.                                         20.00
    Birmingham. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                5.00
    Branford. H. G. Harrison                                   5.00
    Canterbury. Westminster Cong. Ch.                          4.15
    Central Village. Cong. Ch.                                10.00
    Chester. “I. O.”                                           5.00
    East Hampton. Cong Ch.                                    25.00
    Fair Haven. Cong. Ch. Bbl. of C. _for
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst._
    Farmington. A. F. Williams, to const. CLARENCE
      BROWNING VORCE, L. M.                                   30.00
    Goshen. Cong. Ch.                                         14.78
    Greenfield Hill. Cong. Ch., adl.                          18.30
    Greenwich. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                       5.31
    Griswold. First Cong.. Ch.                                30.00
    Hadlyme. R. E. Hungerford, 100: Jos. W.
      Hungerford, 100; Cong. Ch., 7                          207.00
    Kensington. Mrs. M. Hotchkiss                              5.00
    New Britain. Mrs. Alonzo Astor                             3.00
    New Haven. Nelson Hall                                    50.00
    Norfolk. “B.”                                              2.00
    North Guilford. Sarah R Fowler                             6.00
    Norwich Town. “*. Cong. Ch.”                              35.00
    Plantsville. “A Friend.” 300; E. E. Stone,
      100; H. D. Smith. 100; Stephen Walker, 60;
      Geo. F. Smith, 25; E. W. Twichell, 25; O. W.
      Stone, 20; W. S. Ward. 10; Mrs. J. C. P., 5;
      C. L. Ames, 5; C. D. Smith, 5, _for Atlanta
      U._                                                    655.00
    Putnam. Ladies, _for Student Aid, Straight U._             2.00
    Ridgefield. First Cong. Ch.                               32.14
    Salem. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  6.00
    South Britain. Cong Ch.                                   36.00
    Stafford. Mrs. T. H. Thresher                              5.00
    Stamford. “A Friend ”                                      5.00
    Terryville. Cong. Ch. 180, to const. MAGGIE
      MCNAUGHTON, SUSIE BELLE GRANNIS, LURA
      GENEVIEVE BUNNELL, ANNIE S. COOK and EMMA C.
      L. CASTLE L. Ms.; Elizur Fenn. 5; Mrs.
      Elizur Fenn, 5                                         190.00
    Thomaston. Cong Ch.                                       24.46
    Tolland. Cong. Ch.                                        13.59
    Trumbull. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              16.43
    Union. Cong. Ch.                                           2.12
    West Hartford. Cong. Ch.                                  30.40
    West Hartford. Anson Chappell                              5.00
    West Winsted. Second Cong. Ch.                           201.27
    Wethersfield. First Ch of Christ                          60.59
    Wolcott. Cong. Ch.                                        10.03
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             18.25
                                                          ---------
                                                          $1,798.82

    LEGACIES.

    Goshen. Estate of Miss Sarah Beach, by Henry
      Norton, Ex.                                            500.00
    New London. Trust Estate of Henry P. Haven
      (_of which_ $300 _for Talladega C._ and $200
      _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst._)                         850.00
    Orange. Estate of Mrs. H. Coe, by L. W.
      Cutler. Ex.                                            250.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $3,398.82


  NEW YORK, $22,720.10.

    Big Hollow. Nelson Hitchcock                               5.00
    Binghamton. Mrs. Chauncey Bean, _for Woman’s
      Work_                                                    5.00
    Blauveltville. “A Friend”                                  1.50
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Sab. Sch. _for
      Missionaries, Fernandina, Fla._                        100.00
    Clifton Springs. Rev. Lewis Bodwell                        2.00
    Coventryville. First Cong. Ch.                            10.56
    Eaton. Cong. Ch.                                          13.25
    Hancock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
    Ithaca. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Theo.
      Dept., Talladega C._                                    35.00
    New York. “Friends”                                       50.00
    Nyack. John W. Towt                                       50.00
    Port Byron. Sarah B. Osburn, _for Chinese M._              0.50
    Poughkeepsie. First Cong. Ch.                             40.08
    Sherburne. Cong. Ch.                                      59.41
    West Groton. Cong. Ch. 19.54 Sab. Sch. 1.46               21.00
    Wellsville. Cong. Ch.                                     22.97
    Yaphank. Mrs. Hampton Overton, _for Chinese M._            5.00
    ——. ——                                                    60.08
                                                            -------
                                                            $491.35

    LEGACIES.

    Deansville. Estate of Mrs. Polly M. Barton, by
      D. W. Barton and Jos. F. Barton, Exs.                  500.00
    Victor. Estate of Emeline Lewis, by D. Henry
      Osborne, Ex.                                        21,728.75
                                                         ----------
                                                         $22,720.10


  NEW JERSEY, $1,110.00.

    Newfield. Rev. Charles Willy                              10.00
    LEGACY.
    Orange. Estate of John Hancock, by Exs.                 1100.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $1,110.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $26.23.

    Cambridgeboro. Cong. Ch., 13.23; Ladies’
      Miss’y Soc. of Cong. Ch., 10                            23.23
    Troy. Moss Grove Sab. Sch.                                 3.00


  OHIO, $302.87.

    Adam Mills. Mrs. M. A. Smith                              10.00
    Ashtabula. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Theo. Dept.,
      Talladega C._                                           28.20
    Chatham Center. Cong. Ch.                                 26.37
    Cincinnati. Seventh St. Cong. Ch.                         51.09
    Garrettsville. Cong. Ch.                                  12.00
    Medina. Cong. Ch., to const. C. B. ABBOTT and
      FRANK NETTLETON L. Ms.                                  75.12
    Medina. Ladies Miss’y Soc. _for Talladega C.,
      Freight_                                                 2.00
    Newburg. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                   8.52
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                 20.57
    Toledo. First Cong. Ch.                                   52.00
    Wakeman. B. T. Strong                                      5.00
    Willoughby. Mary P. Hastings                              12.00


  INDIANA, $10.00.

    Auburn. James Adams                                       10.00


  ILLINOIS, $508.46.

    Chenoa. Cong. Ch.                                         13.35
    Chicago. First Cong. Ch. 108.83; N. E. Cong.
      Ch., 64.68; “A Friend” 50, to const. JAMES
      W. PORTER L. M.                                        223.51
    Chicago. U. P. Cong. Sab Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      50.00
    Chicago. C. H. Morse, Scales, val. 31.75, _for
      Talladega C._
    Geneseo. Cong. Ch.                                        35.00
    Hutsonville. C. V. Newton                                  5.00
    La Harpe. Cong. Ch.                                       10.50
    Lamoille. Cong. Ch.                                       24.41
    Lockport. First Cong. Ch.                                 14.36
    Newark. Horace Day                                         5.00
    Peoria. Rev. A. A. Stevens                                10.00
    Prospect Park. Cong. Ch.                                   7.00
    Roseville. L. C. Axtell                                  100.00
    Woodburn. Cong. Ch.                                       10.33


  MICHIGAN, $126.33.

    Ann Arbor. Cong. Ch.                                      31.41
    Benzonia. “A Friend”                                      10.00
    Eaton Rapids. First Cong. Ch. (3 of which from
      Mrs. C. C. P. Taylor)                                   30.92
    Kalamazoo. “*”                                             3.00
    North Leoni. Cong. Ch.                                     6.00
    Northville. D. Pomeroy                                     5.00
    Olivet. Wm. J. Hickok                                     20.00
    Ransom. Ladies’ Aid Soc. of First Cong. Ch.,
      _for Indian M._                                         10.00
    Vermontville. “A Friend”                                  10.00


  IOWA, $272.13.

    Alden. Cong. Ch.                                           7.40
    Cedar Rapids. Mrs. T. M. Sinclair, _for a New
      Mission, Poncas Indians_                               200.00
    Eldora. Cong. Ch.                                          4.68
    Grinnell. Prof. Fisk P. Brewer, _for Raleigh,
      N.C._                                                   10.00
    Le Mars. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   4.61
    Lewis. Cong. Ch., 13; Mrs. O. C. Warne, 5                 18.00
    McGregor. Woman’s Miss’y Soc.                             10.44
    Peterson. Cong. Ch.                                        2.00
    Sioux Rapids. Cong. Ch.                                    5.00
                                                           --------
                                                            $262.13

    LEGACY.

    Grinnell. Estate of E. Marvin, by W. B. & J.
      M. Dunn, Exrs.                                          10.00
                                                             ------
                                                            $272.13


  WISCONSIN, $359.14.

    Alderley. Mrs. Anna Reid, 2.50; Mrs. E.
      Hubbard, $2.50                                           5.00
    Appleton. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 1.25; “A
      Friend,” 75c., _for Lady Missionary,
      Montgomery, Ala._                                        2.00
    Arena. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Montgomery, Ala._                            2.46
    Beloit. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Montgomery, Ala._                           75.85
    Bristol and Paris. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for
      Lady Missionary, Montgomery, Ala._                      10.00
    Fond du Lac. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Montgomery, Ala._                           10.00
    Janesville. Cong. Ch.                                     19.51
    Madison. First Cong. Ch.                                  75.00
    Milwaukee. Grand Av. Cong. Ch.                            43.32
    Racine. Mrs. Smith and Marsh                              10.00
    Whitewater. “Friends,” by Prof. A. Salisbury,
      _for Reading Rooms_                                    106.00


  MINNESOTA, $131.27.

    Afton. L. I. Olds                                         10.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch. 41.18; Mrs. W. K.
      Smith, 4.50                                             45.68
    Northfield. Cong Ch.                                      56.59
    Northfield. Mrs. Knowlton, 5; M. Bryant, 2; G.
      M. Phillips, 2; Rev. A. Willey, 1.50; Mrs.
      Norton, 1; Mrs. Nourse, 50c., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      12.00
    Sauk Center. Rev. J. C. Holbrook, D.D.                     5.00
    Springfield. Cong. Ch.                                     2.00


  KANSAS, $34.34.

    Manhattan. First Cong. Ch.                                20.64
    McPherson. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                                6.70
    Olatne. Rev. W. W. McMillan                                1.00
    ——. “W. H. M. S.”                                          6.00


  MISSOURI, $17.75.

    Brookfield. Cong. Ch.                                      7.75
    Kidder. S. O. Coult                                        5.00
    St. Louis. Mrs. R. Webb, _for Library,
      Straight U._                                             5.00


  NEBRASKA, $11.70.

    Creighton. First Cong. Ch.                                 6.70
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00


  DAKOTA, $10.06.

    Clark. Cong. Ch.                                          10.06


  COLORADO, $10.00.

    Colorado Springs. Cong. Sab. Sch.                         10.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $312.50.

    Washington. United States Gov., _for Sisseton
      Agency_                                                312.50


  TENNESSEE, $121.00.

    Chattanooga. Sales, by Mrs. A. S. Steele, _for
      Orphans from Chattanooga at Tougaloo U._               107.00
    Knoxville. Second Cong. Ch.                               12.00
    Nashville. Howard Chapel Cong. Ch.                         2.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $5.00.

    Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $12.00.

    Charleston. Plymouth Ch.                                  10.00
    Greenwood. Coll. by Rev. L. C. J.                          2.00


  GEORGIA, $82.50.

    Macon. Cong. Ch., 15; Mrs. Lizzie A. Hodge, 15            30.00
    Savannah. Concert, Beach Inst, 32.50; Rent, 20            52.50


  ALABAMA, $121.90.

    Marion. Cong. Ch.                                          3.00
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition, 2.20; Cong.
      Ch., 55c.                                                2.75
    Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
    Selma. Cong Ch., 14.15; Temperance Concert,
      1.75                                                    15.90
    Talladega. Talladega C. Tuition, 74.65; Cong.
      Ch., 10                                                 84.65
    Talladega. A. Bingham & Co., _for Needmore
      Chapel, Talladega C._                                    5.60


  MISSISSIPPI, $2.00.

    Jackson. Collected by Chas. L. Harris.                    2. 00


  INCOMES, $287.85.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                               257.85
    Belden Fund, _for Talladega C._                           30.00


  TURKEY, $50.00.

    Constantinople. The Missionary Children’s
      Missionary Soc. in Turkey and Bulgaria, by
      Miss Belle Bliss, Treas., _for a girl,
      Dakota Home_                                            50.00


  INDIA, $4.85.

    Bombay. Women’s Benev. Sec., _for Dakota Home_             4.85
                                                          ---------
      Total for August                                   $33,333.26
    Total from Oct. 1 to Aug. 31                        $262,579.95
                                                        ===========


  FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions                                             32.74
    Previously acknowledged                                  739.22
                                                            -------
      Total                                                 $771.96
                                                            =======

                                      H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
                                                56 Reade St., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




PROPOSED CONSTITUTION OF THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.


ART. I. This society to be called the American Missionary
Association.

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations and diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

ART. III. Members may be constituted for life by the payment of
thirty dollars into the treasury of the Association, with the
written declaration at the time or times of payment that the sum is
to be applied to constitute a designated person a life member; and
such membership shall begin sixty days after the payment shall have
been completed.

Every church which has within a year contributed to the funds of
the Association and every State Conference or Association of such
churches may appoint two delegates to the Annual Meeting of the
Association; such delegates, duly attested by credentials, shall be
members of the Association for the year for which they were thus
appointed.

ART. IV. The Annual Meeting of the Association shall be held in
the month of October or November, at such time and place as may be
designated by the Executive Committee, by notice printed in the
official publication of the Association for the preceding month.

ART. V. The officers of the Association shall be a President,
five Vice-Presidents, a Corresponding Secretary or Secretaries,
a Recording Secretary, a Treasurer, Auditors, and an Executive
Committee of fifteen members, all of whom shall be elected by
ballot.

At the first Annual Meeting after the adoption of this
Constitution, five members of the Executive Committee shall be
elected for the term of one year, five for two years and five for
three years, and at each subsequent Annual Meeting, five members
shall be elected for the full term of three years, and such others
as shall be required to fill vacancies.

ART. VI. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds, the appointing, counseling, sustaining
and dismissing of missionaries and agents, and the selection of
missionary fields. They shall have authority to fill all vacancies
in office occurring between the Annual Meetings; to apply to any
Legislature for acts of incorporation, or conferring corporate
powers; to make provision when necessary for disabled missionaries
and for the widows and children of deceased missionaries, and in
general to transact all such business as usually appertains to the
Executive Committees of missionary and other benevolent societies.
The acts of the Committee shall be subject to the revision of the
Annual Meeting.

Five members of the Committee constitute a quorum for transacting
business.

ART. VII. No person shall be made an officer of this Association
who is not a member of some evangelical church.

ART. VIII. Missionary bodies and churches or individuals may
appoint and sustain missionaries of their own, through the agency
of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. IX. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution except by
the vote of two-thirds of the members present at an Annual Meeting,
the amendment having been approved by the vote of a majority at the
previous Annual Meeting.

       *       *       *       *       *




                             The Great
                              Church
                              LIGHT.


[Illustration]

=FRINK’S Patent Reflectors= give the =Most Powerful=, the
=Softest=, =Cheapest= and the =Best= Light known for Churches,
Stores, Show Windows, Parlors, Banks, Offices, Picture Galleries,
Theatres, Depots, etc. New and elegant designs. Send size of room.
Get circular and estimate. A liberal discount to churches and the
trade.

                               I. P. FRINK, 551 Pearl St. N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           TO INVESTORS.

             $925 will buy a $1,000 6 per cent. gold
                        coupon bond of the

                East and West R. R. Co. of Alabama

This is a strictly first-class investment bond secured by a first
mortgage on an old road, fully built and equipped, that has always
paid its interest, and earns a dividend on its stock besides. This
bond will pay you =$30= every six months. No taxes, no trouble, and
a safe investment. For sale by the EAST AND WEST R. R. CO. OF ALA.,
502 B’way, or AMERICAN LOAN AND TRUST CO., 113 B’way, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                  [Illustration: COUNT RUMFORD.]

                            HORSFORD’S

                          ACID PHOSPHATE.

                             (LIQUID.)

               FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL,
                     EXHAUSTION, NERVOUSNESS,
                   DIMINISHED VITALITY, URINARY
                        DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

              PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF

             Prof. E. N. Horsford, of Cambridge, Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical
authority of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has
even been offered to the public which seems to happily meet the
general want as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free
on application.

                        MANUFACTURED BY THE

                      RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,

                         Providence, R.I.,

                  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            SKIN HUMORS

                          CAN BE CURED BY

                       GLENN’S SULPHUR SOAP.


                                 SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 16, 1883.
  _Mr. C. N. Crittenton_:

  DEAR SIR: I wish to call your attention to the good your
  Sulphur Soap has done me. For nearly fourteen years I have been
  troubled with a skin humor resembling salt rheum. I have spent
  nearly a small fortune for doctors and medicine, but with only
  temporary relief. I commenced using your “Glenn’s Sulphur Soap”
  nearly two years ago—=used it in baths and as a toilet soap
  daily. My skin is now as clear as an infant’s, and no one would
  be able to tell that I ever had a skin complaint.= I would not
  be without the soap if it cost five time the amount.

  Yours respectfully.
                                                  M. H. MORRIS

  LICK HOUSE, San Francisco, Cal.


The above testimonial is indisputable evidence that Glenn’s Sulphur
Soap will eliminate poisonous Skin Diseases WHEN ALL OTHER MEANS
HAVE FAILED. To this fact thousands have testified; and that it
will banish lesser afflictions, such as common PIMPLES, ERUPTIONS
and SORES, and keep the skin clear and beautiful, is absolutely
certain. For this reason ladies whose complexions have been
improved by the use of this soap NOW MAKE IT A CONSTANT TOILET
APPENDAGE. The genuine always bears the name of C. N. CRITTENTON,
115 Fulton street, New York, sole proprietor. For sale by all
druggists or mailed to any address on receipt of 30 cents in
stamps, or three cakes for 75 cents.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           J. & R. LAMB,
                        59 Carmine Street.
                  Sixth Ave. cars pass the door.

                          [Illustration]

                              BANNERS

                             IN SILK,

                           NEW DESIGNS.

                         CHURCH FURNITURE

                    SEND FOR HAND BOOK BY MAIL.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        PEARLS IN THE MOUTH

                          [Illustration]

                       Beauty and Fragrance

                 Are communicated to the mouth by

                             SOZODONT

which renders the _teeth pearly white_, the gums rosy, and the
_breath sweet_. By those who have used it, it is regarded as an
indispensable adjunct of the toilet. It thoroughly _removes tartar_
from the teeth, without injuring the enamel.

                         SOLD BY DRUGGISTS

                            EVERYWHERE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             MANHATTAN

                     LIFE INS. CO. OF NEW YORK

                      _156 and 158 Broadway._


                        THIRTY-THIRD YEAR.


  DESCRIPTION—One of the oldest, strongest, best.

  POLICIES—Incontestable, non-forfeitable, definite cash
  surrender values.

  RATES—Safe, low, and participating or not, as desired.

  RISKS carefully selected.

  PROMPT, liberal dealing.

GENERAL AGENTS AND CANVASSERS WANTED in desirable territory, to
whom permanent employment and liberal compensation will be given.

Address

                                         H. STOKES, President.

  H. Y. WEMPLE, Sec’y.
  S. N. STEBBINS, Act’y.
  J. L. HALSEY, 1st V.-P.
  H. B. STOKES, 2d V.-P


                 *       *       *       *       *


                                THE

                         Religious Herald

                            ENTERED ITS

                         FORTY-FIRST YEAR

January 1st. 1883, aiming as heretofore to be a safe and valuable
aid in the family to an intelligent and practical knowledge of the
world, and how to live in it. It will urge the claims of religion
upon all, not forgetting the little children; and will discuss the
practical questions of the day with candor; advocating earnestly
the cause of temperance; speaking freely on all subjects, literary,
educational, civil, social or financial, and aiming to speak
wisely. Its reviews and articles, correspondence and comments,
notes and summaries of news, will be carefully edited. It will
seek to be useful to all whom it can reach and will deem it ample
reward for much hard labor, if it can in any way serve the cause
of Christ; having a special love for the old historic churches
of Connecticut, commonly called Congregational, but rejoicing to
be a co-worker with all who love our Lord Jesus Christ, and seek
to bless and save men. We ask the co-operation and patronage of
all who are in sympathy with our aim, and hope for an increase of
subscribers, such as will enable us to work more efficiently in the
field we are striving to cultivate.

TERMS: $2.10 cts. per year.

TO ADVERTISERS:—8 cts. per line; $18 an inch one year.

                      OFFICE, HARTFORD, CONN.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    LADIES ALL OVER THE WORLD.

                        GODEY’S LADY’S BOOK

    Will be sent for one year to any address on receipt of $2.

                       GODEY’S LADY’S BOOK,

                    Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.A.,

WHICH IS RECOGNIZED AS THE LEADING =FASHION= AND =HOME= MAGAZINE IN
AMERICA. THE LEADING ATTRACTIONS FOR 1884 ARE THE FOLLOWING:

=24 BEAUTIFUL COLORED FASHION PLATES=, executed by the French
process, representing the prevailing fashions in both style and
color, produced especially for and published exclusively in GODEY’S
LADY’S BOOK.

=12 ENGRAVED PLATES OF FASHIONS= in black and white, illustrating
leading styles.

=12 FINELY EXECUTED STEEL ENGRAVINGS= by the best artists, made for
GODEY’S LADY’S BOOK.

=12 ENGRAVED PORTRAITS OF EX-PRESIDENTS= of the U.S. which form a
part of what is known in GODEY’S LADY’S BOOK as the

                  Presidential Portrait Gallery,

each being accompanied by a short biographical sketch.

=150 PAGES, ILLUSTRATING FASHIONS= and fancy needle work.

=12 PAGES OF ARCHITECTURAL DESIGNS= showing plans and perspective
of Houses and Cottages of all descriptions.

=12 FULL SIZE CUT PAPER PATTERNS=, with full and explicit
instructions for use.

                     200 GODEY’S LADY’S BOOKS

Celebrated household cooking receipts, each having been tested by
practical housekeepers before publishing.

                     24 Pages of Select Music.

=BESIDES= embracing a rich array of literature. Novels, Novelettes,
Stories and Poems, by eminent writers, among whom are

  Marion Harland,
  Christian Reid,
  Ella Rodman Church,
  Augusta de Bubna,
  Mrs. Sheffey Peters,
  Helen Mathers, Author of “Cherry Ripe.”

=THE ART DEPARTMENT= will be under the direction of Wm. McLeod,
Curator of Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C. All other
departments under equally competent direction.

                Subscription Price $2.00 per Year.

For further information send for circular. Sample copy of GODEY’S
LADY’S BOOK, 15c. Stamps taken. To avoid errors write plainly your
address, giving County and State.

=GODEY’S LADY’S BOOK=, 1006 Chestnut St., Philadelphia, Pa.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    7 PER CENT. to 8 PER CENT.

                     Interest Net to Investors

                    In First Mortgage Bonds ON

                         IMPROVED FARMS in

                          Iowa, Minnesota

                            and Dakota,

                            SECURED BY

                        ORMSBY BROS. & CO.,

                  BANKERS, LOAN AND LAND BROKERS,

                         EMMETSBURG, IOWA.


          _11 Years’ Experience. Loans Absolutely Safe._

        References and Circulars forwarded on Application.


            _BRANCH BANKS AT MITCHELL AND HURON, D.T._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,

                   FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A

                       COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A

                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

[Illustration:

  SMITH
  AMERICAN
  ORGANS]

                           ARE THE BEST.


                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at

  BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
  LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
  KANSAS CITY, Mo., 817 Main Street;
  ATLANTA, GA., 27 Whitehall Street;
  Or, DEFIANCE, O.


                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  THE
  RISING SUN
  STOVE POLISH]

    For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil,
    For freeness from dust and slowness to soil,
    And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed,
    And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

    Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
    The half risen sun every package should bear;
    For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use,
    And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *




ANNUAL MEETING OF THE A. M. A.


The Thirty-seventh Annual Meeting of the American Missionary
Association will be held in the Central Congregational Church,
Brooklyn, N.Y. (Dr. Behrends), beginning Tuesday, October 30 at 3
P.M. and closing on the evening of Thursday, November 1.

The sermon will be preached by Rev. John L. Withrow, D.D., of
Boston, Mass., Tuesday evening, at 7:30, to be followed by the
communion service.

The citizens of Brooklyn will cordially welcome to their homes
all persons in attendance at the meetings. Those wishing such
hospitality are requested to forward their applications to Richard
M. Montgomery, 169 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N.Y., before October
15, specifying in their letters the time of their proposed arrival.

Applicants will receive cards of introduction to families in which
they will be entertained. Should any person after receiving a card
of assignment decide not to attend the meetings, he will please
notify the Committee at once, that his place may be given to some
other applicant.

Negotiations are in progress to secure reduced rates of travel over
different railway and steamboat lines, the results of which will be
given at an early day.

Any further information which may be needed will be gladly
furnished on application to either of the undersigned.

  WM. G. HOOPLE, Chairman, 325 Greene Avenue.
       RICHARD M. MONTGOMERY, Secretary, 169 Columbia Heights.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: Estey Organ

  J. Estey & Co
  Brattleboro Vt.]

As musical culture increases it demands in musical instruments for
home, church, or school, excellence in tone, tasteful workmanship,
and durability.


                  SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


        ATKIN & PROUT, Printers, 12 Barclay St., New York.




Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions silently
corrected. Inconsistent hyphenation retained due to the
multiplicity of authors.

Changed “BEQEATH” to “BEQUEATH” on the inside cover (I BEQUEATH to
my executor).

Changed “us” to “as” on page 311 (there are others as poor as
themselves).

Changed “enthusastic” to “enthusiastic” on page 312 (very
enthusiastic in their work).

Changed “Woman’ Msissionary” to “Woman’s Missionary” on page 312
(Woman’s Missionary Society).

Changed “purned” to “burned” on page 312 (Our church was burned a
year ago).

Changed “Fragance” to “Fragrance” on page 319 (Beauty and Fragrance)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 37, NO. 10, OCTOBER, 1883 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.