_Adventures In Elegance_


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

    [Illustration: {decorative border}]

Adventuring with new recipes is part of what makes homemaking enjoyable.
Each discovery helps to add your special touch to the foods you serve to
family and friends.

With foods like sparkling-bright canned fruit pie fillings available to
you, it’s easy and fun to create new dishes. These fresh-fruit pie
fillings can be used in a myriad of ways right from the can ... as
toppings for cheese cakes, sauces for sundaes or ham slices or as rich
fillings for quick-to-fix pies. You’ll want to try them, too, as the
master ingredients in breads and cakes, cookies and pretty party
desserts. Sample the offerings here and then go adventuring on your own;
canned fruit pie fillings can add the magic that will set your meals
apart from the rest.

    [Illustration: {decorative border}]




                      _Heavenly Homebaked Breads_


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  _Set a mood that’s both glamorous and homey with the warm fragrance
 and taste of breads fresh from your oven. They’re wonderful any time,
                           for any occasion!_


Bonny Berry Bread

  ½ cup butter
  ¾ cup sugar
  1 egg
  ⅓ cup milk
  2 cups sifted all-purpose flour
  2 teaspoons baking powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 No. 2 can (2 cups) blueberry pie filling

Cream butter and sugar; beat in egg. Blend in milk. Sift together dry
ingredients and add to creamed mixture. Spread half the batter in a
greased 8x8x2-inch pan; cover with ¾ can blueberry pie filling. Spread
remaining batter over pie filling; top with remaining pie filling. Mix ½
cup sugar, ½ cup flour and ½ teaspoon cinnamon; cut in 2 tablespoons
butter. Sprinkle crumb mixture over bread. Bake at 375° for 30 to 40
minutes.


Kwicky Cherry Kolaches

  2 cans refrigerated crescent dinner rolls
  1 No. 2 can (2 cups) cherry pie filling
  1 tablespoon orange juice
  1 cup sifted confectioners’ sugar

Unroll packaged refrigerator roll dough; place 1 square made up of 2
triangles on a floured surface. Roll or pat to even dough and make a
6-inch square; cut in half as marked to make 2 triangles. Place
triangles on ungreased baking sheet. Place 1 tablespoon of cherry pie
filling in the center of the triangle. Pick up the 2 long ends, fold
over filling, bringing them together at the center point to form a
square; pinch edges to seal. Repeat with remaining rolls and pie
filling. Bake at 375° for 15 minutes or until browned. Blend orange
juice and confectioners’ sugar; drizzle over the hot rolls to glaze.
Makes 16 rolls.

  Note: Make up half the recipe using one can of rolls; cover and
  refrigerate the remaining pie filling to use another day in fresh
  rolls.


Dutch Apple Coffee Cake

  1 13-ounce package coffee cake mix or hot roll mix
  1 cup water
  2 tablespoons melted butter
  1 egg, beaten
  1 No. 2 can (2 cups) apple pie filling
  ¼ cup sugar
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ cup chopped pecans

Mix coffee cake or hot roll mix according to package directions, using 1
cup water. Stir in melted butter and beaten egg. Let rise in warm spot
until double in size (about 1 hour). Spoon into a buttered 13x9x2-inch
baking pan. Spoon apple pie filling over batter. Mix sugar and cinnamon;
sprinkle over pie filling. Top with chopped pecans. Cover and place in a
warm spot until double in size (about 30 or 40 minutes). Bake in a 400°
oven for 20 to 25 minutes. Drizzle with powdered sugar icing, if
desired.




                       _Perfectly Marvelous Pies_


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  _Apple and cherry, lemon and raisin—what wonderful pies there are to
   make! Each can become a specialty of yours, a discovery in elegant
            eating that’s well worth your while to prepare._


Spicy Frozen Raisin Pie

  1 No. 2 can (2 cups) raisin pie filling
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  ¼ teaspoon cloves
  ¼ teaspoon nutmeg
  ½ teaspoon vanilla
  ¼ cup chopped pecans
  1 6-ounce can (⅔ cup) evaporated milk, chilled and whipped
  1 9-inch graham cracker crust

Combine pie filling, spices and vanilla; stir in pecans. Fold in whipped
evaporated milk. Mound into prepared crust. Freeze until firm.


Peanut Crunch Apple Pie

  ½ cup chunk style peanut butter
  ¼ cup soft butter or margarine
  ½ cup light brown sugar
  1 cup sifted all-purpose flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  2 No. 2 cans (2 cups each) apple pie filling
  1 10-inch unbaked pastry shell

Blend peanut butter, butter and brown sugar into flour and salt until
mixture is crumbly. Spoon apple pie filling into unbaked crust; sprinkle
peanut butter mixture over pie filling. Bake in a 400° oven for 30 to 35
minutes or until filling is hot and pastry browned.


Pineapple Sundae Pie

  1 package vanilla pudding mix
  2 cups milk
  2 eggs, separated
  1 package pineapple-orange flavored gelatin
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  1 9-inch baked pie shell
  1 No. 2 can (2 cups) pineapple pie filling
  Whipped cream, chopped pecans and cherries

Combine vanilla pudding mix, small amount of milk and 2 egg yolks; blend
well. Add remaining milk and cook, stirring constantly until mixture
boils and thickens. Add pineapple-orange gelatin and stir until
dissolved; cool. Blend in sour cream. Beat egg whites until soft peaks
form. Fold into pudding mixture. Pour into baked pie shell. Chill. When
ready to serve, cut pie into wedges and spoon pineapple pie filling over
each. Top with whipped cream, chopped pecans and cherries.


Rainbow Cherry Pie

  1 unbaked 9-inch pie shell
  1 No. 2 can (2 cups) cherry pie filling
  ¼ cup milk
  2 cups colored miniature marshmallows
  1 cup heavy cream, whipped

Fill pie shell with pie filling; bake in a 425° oven for 25 minutes.
Cool and chill. Heat milk almost to boiling. Add marshmallows and stir
until they are softened and partially melted. Cool. Fold into whipped
cream. Spread cream mixture over top of chilled pie.


Glazed Raisin-Cherry Pie

  Pastry for 2 crust pie
  1 No. 2 can (2 cups) raisin pie filling
  ½ can cherry pie filling[1]
  1 teaspoon grated lemon peel
  ⅓ cup sugar
  ¼ cup water
  1 teaspoon butter or margarine
  1 tablespoon cornstarch
  1 tablespoon cold water
  1½ tablespoons lemon juice

Roll out pastry for bottom crust and fit into a 9-inch pie plate.
Combine pie fillings and lemon peel; spoon into pastry. Roll out
remaining pastry; slash and adjust over filling; trim and crimp edge.
Bake in a 400° oven for 30 to 35 minutes or until crust is golden brown.
Cool pie for 15 to 20 minutes. Combine sugar, water and butter in a
saucepan; heat until sugar is dissolved. Combine cornstarch and water;
add to hot mixture and heat until thickened. Stir in the lemon juice.
Spread over pie.


[1]Use remaining cherry pie filling as a sauce over ice cream, cake or
    pudding.


Swedish Apple Cake

                                                    (It’s really a pie!)

  ⅓ cup butter
  3 tablespoons sugar
  2 egg yolks
  ¾ cup sifted, enriched flour
  ⅓ cup finely chopped blanched almonds
  1 tablespoon grated lemon peel
  1 No. 2 can (2 cups) apple pie filling
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  ⅓ cup raspberry jam
  2 egg whites
  ¼ cup sugar

Cream butter and 3 tablespoons sugar together; add egg yolks and mix
well. Add flour, almonds and lemon peel. Mix until flour is moistened.
Press onto the bottom and sides of a 9-inch pie plate. Bake in a 350°
oven for 15 minutes or until browned. Combine apple pie filling and
lemon juice; heat to boiling. Spread jam over baked crust and top with
hot apple mix. Beat egg whites until fluffy; gradually add ¼ cup sugar
and continue to beat until stiff peaks form. Spread over apples, sealing
to the edge. Bake in 350° oven for 18 minutes or until meringue is
lightly browned. Makes 9-inch pie.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]




                      _Fabulous Festive Desserts_


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

 _Sometimes it’s the occasion that dictates the dessert; at other times
  a truly spectacular treat will be enough to turn a casual gathering
    into a party. One thing we’re certain of ... each of these gala
                        desserts is delectable!_


Peach Smoothee

  1 No. 2 can (2 cups) peach pie filling
  1 15-ounce can sweetened condensed milk
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  ½ cup chopped pecans
  2 tablespoons chopped candied ginger
  1½ cups heavy cream, whipped

Beat pie filling and condensed milk together until peaches are crushed.
Mix in lemon juice, pecans and candied ginger. Fold in whipped cream.
Pour into 3 ice cube trays and freeze until firm. Makes 1½ quarts.


Mincemeat Filled Cookies

  1½ cups shortening
  ¾ cup brown sugar
  ¾ cup sugar
  1 egg
  4½ tablespoons milk
  1½ teaspoons vanilla
  4½ cups sifted all-purpose flour
  ¾ teaspoon salt
  ¾ teaspoon soda
  1 No. 2 can (2 cups) mincemeat pie filling
  ½ cup orange marmalade

Cream shortening and sugars together until fluffy. Add egg, milk, and
vanilla; beat well. Sift dry ingredients together; add to creamed
mixture and mix well. Wrap dough in waxed paper and chill well. Roll ¼
of dough at a time on a floured surface to ⅛-inch thickness. Cut with a
2½-inch round cutter. Place cookies 1 inch apart on an ungreased baking
sheet. Combine pie filling and marmalade; place 1 tablespoon of mixture
on each cooky. Roll ¼ of dough as directed; cut with 2½-inch cutter and
cut a small hole in center of each cooky with a small cutter. Place over
filling, centering hole; seal edges by pressing with a fork. Bake at
375° for 10 to 12 minutes. Repeat with remaining dough and filling.
Makes 4½ dozen.


Berry Squares

  1 8-inch angel cake, cut into ½-inch squares
  1 No. 2 can (2 cups) strawberry pie filling
  1 package instant lemon pudding mix
  1½ cups milk
  1 cup dairy sour cream

Put half the cake squares in a 9x9x2-inch pan. Spoon pie filling over
cake; top with remaining cake squares. Combine pudding mix, milk and
sour cream; beat until smooth. Spoon over cake. Chill several hours. Cut
into squares. Makes 9 servings.


Icy Lemon Soufflé

  1 3-oz. package lemon-flavored gelatin
  ½ cup boiling water
  1 No. 2 can (2 cups) lemon pie filling
  3 egg whites, stiffly beaten
  1 cup heavy cream, whipped

Dissolve gelatin in boiling water. Beat in the pie filling until smooth.
Cool. Fold in egg whites and whipped cream. Pour into a 1½ quart soufflé
dish or casserole. Chill until firm or for several hours.


Apple Fruit Cake

  ½ cup butter
  1 No. 2 can (2 cups) apple pie filling
  1 cup sugar
  2 cups all-purpose flour
  2 teaspoons soda
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon nutmeg
  ¼ teaspoon ground cloves
  1½ cups raisins
  1½ cups currants
  1 cup pecans
  1 cup mixed candied fruit
  1 cup candied cherries

Melt butter in a saucepan; add apple pie filling and sugar. Continue
heating, stirring occasionally until sugar melts; cool. Sift together
dry ingredients. Mix raisins, currants, pecans, candied fruits and
cherries with dry ingredients. Combine apple mixture and dry
ingredients. Pour into foil-lined 9-inch tube pan. Bake at 300° for 90
minutes or until done. Serve with butter sauce if desired.


                              Butter Sauce

  ¼ cup butter
  ½ cup confectioners’ sugar
  ½ cup cold water
  1½ teaspoons cornstarch
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  ½ teaspoon vinegar

Cream butter; gradually add sifted confectioners’ sugar, creaming until
fluffy. Stir cold water into cornstarch; cook and stir until clear and
thick. Stir hot mixture into butter mixture; add vanilla and vinegar.
Serve warm. Makes about ¾ cup.


Dessert Pancakes

  2 eggs
  ½ cup water
  1½ cups packaged layer or pound cake mix (1 9-ounce package)
  1 No. 2 can (2 cups) blueberry pie filling
  3 tablespoons butter
  1 teaspoon lemon juice
  1 pint vanilla ice cream

Combine eggs, water and cake mix. Beat until smooth. Drop by tablespoons
onto a hot greased griddle and bake on each side. Heat pie filling,
butter and lemon juice together. Spoon filling between and on top of
stacks of 4 pancakes each. Keep warm until serving time. Stir ice cream
to soften and spoon over pancake stacks. Makes 40 2½ inch pancakes, or
ten servings.




                          _Collector’s Corner_


    [Illustration: {decorative border}]

• Use cherry or blueberry pie fillings to top a towering angel food cake
      filled with vanilla pudding. They’re good, too, spooned over
      brownies capped with vanilla ice cream.

• Spoon peach pie filling into well-greased muffin pans with chopped
      pecans and a dot of butter. Top with a biscuit from a roll of
      refrigerated biscuits and bake as directed on package. When baked,
      let stand a few minutes before inverting onto a serving plate.

• Combine a can of pineapple pie filling with 2 cups shredded coconut
      and ¾ teaspoon curry powder. Heat and serve the fragrant sauce
      over chicken with rice.

• For a really terrific sauce, heat together a can each of mincemeat pie
      filling and drained mandarin oranges. This is good spooned over
      pound cake; superb as a sauce over pear halves centered with
      scoops of ice cream.

• Strawberry filling is perfect for valentine-shaped meringue shells.

• Heated raisin pie filling adds a glory note to everything from broiled
      ham slices to old-fashioned bread pudding.

• Apple pie filling is a shelf standby you won’t want to do without
      after you have tried it, heated with ½ cup honey and ½ cup butter,
      spooned generously over Sunday morning waffles.


There’s no doubt about it, each can of fruit pie filling you open is the
wonderful beginning to a whole new world of delightful, applause-winning
dishes. Try them and find out for yourself.

    [Illustration: {decorative border}]


                      _The Pie Filling Institute_
                       333 North Michigan Avenue
                           Chicago, Illinois
                                 60601




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURES IN ELEGANCE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.