10
                                 CAKES
                           HUSBANDS LIKE BEST
                     _FROM SPRY’S RECIPE ROUND-UP!_




           _“Here they are—the 10 cakes husbands like best!”_
                                  says _Aunt Jenny_


    [Illustration: {Aunt Jenny}]

When I recently asked women to send me recipes for the cakes their
husbands like best, I expected to get a lot of good ideas. But I never
dreamed they’d arrive by the truckload! I’ve been simply snowed
under—thousands and thousands of wonderful recipes!

When all the recipes were sorted and listed, we had what amounts to a
real popularity poll. Certain kinds of cake proved to be “husbands’
favorites,” time and again, all over the country!


                          _They’re ALL hits!_

So we took the best recipes we could find for the ten kinds of cake
wives said their husbands like best. We checked them for easy making as
well as luscious eating ... and here they are! They’re tested, they’re
sure-fire and you’ll find they make the most delicious cakes any husband
could ever ask for.


                  _And all sure successes with Spry!_

Of course, since they’re Spry cakes, you’ll find they’re all higher,
lighter, better-tasting! For Spry is homogenized, pre-creamed to mix
more easily with dry ingredients. And Spry is the only kind of
shortening specially made to combine with the liquids your cake recipes
call for. That’s why your Spry cakes are so high ... so light ... so
velvety-textured. _You’ll_ bake a better cake, _be_ a better cook, with
Homogenized Spry.


                      _Which one will HE choose?_

And now you can run your own popularity poll—bake each one of these ten
beauties, and see which wins with HIM. Every one of them will win you
compliments, and among them he’ll find his favorite cake!




                         Chocolate Rapture Cake


    [Illustration: Chocolate Rapture Cake]

  Oven temperature: 350°F. (moderate)
  Baking time: 25-30 min.
  Yield: 2 round 9″ layers

Sift ... 1¾ cups sifted cake flour, 1½ cups sugar, ¾ teaspoon salt, ½
      teaspoon double acting baking powder[1], ¾ teaspoon soda into
      mixing bowl

Add ... ½ cup Homogenized Spry, 3 ounces melted chocolate, 1 cup thick
      sour milk or buttermilk, 1 teaspoon vanilla

Beat ... 200 strokes (2 min. by hand or on mixer at low speed). Scrape
      bowl and spoon or beater.

Add ... 2 unbeaten eggs

Beat ... 200 strokes (same as above)

Stir in ... 1 cup cut-fine coconut

Pour ... into 2 round 9″ Sprycoated layer pans 1¼″ deep

Bake ... until cake tests done

Cool ... and remove from pans, see inside back cover.

Spread ... Tawny Satin Frosting (p. 12) between layers and on top and
      sides.

Dribble ... melted and cooled mixture of ½ oz. chocolate and ½ teaspoon
      Spry around rim of cake, letting a few “ribbons” trickle down
      sides.




                         Spicy Prune Whip Cake


    [Illustration: Spicy Prune Whip Cake]

  Oven temperature: 360°F. (moderate)
  Baking time: 30-35 min.
  Yield: two 8″ round layers

Sift ... 2 cups sifted cake flour, 1⅓ cups sugar, 2 teaspoons double
      acting baking powder[2], ¼ teaspoon soda, ½ teaspoon cinnamon, ½
      teaspoon nutmeg, ½ teaspoon allspice, 1 teaspoon salt into mixing
      bowl

Add ... ½ cup Homogenized Spry, ½ cup unsweetened prune juice, ¼ cup
      milk, 1 teaspoon vanilla

Beat ... 200 strokes (2 min. by hand or on mixer at low speed). Scrape
      bowl and spoon or beater.

Add ... ¼ cup milk, 2 unbeaten eggs

Beat ... 200 strokes (same as above)

Pour ... into 2 Sprycoated 8″ round layer pans 1½″ deep

Bake ... until cake tests done

Cool ... and remove from pans, see inside back cover.

Spread ... Prune Whip Frosting (p. 11) between layers and on sides and
      top.




                          Marble Cake Supreme


    [Illustration: Marble Cake Supreme]

  Oven temperature: 375°F. (moderately hot)
  Baking time: 60-70 min.
  Yield: 1 large tube cake

Sift ... 2¾ cups sifted cake flour, 1¾ cups sugar, 2 teaspoons double
      acting baking powder[3], 1½ teaspoons salt into mixing bowl

Add ... 1 cup Homogenized Spry, ¾ cup milk, 2 teaspoons vanilla, 1
      unbeaten egg

Beat ... 200 strokes (2 min. by hand or on mixer at low speed). Scrape
      bowl and spoon or beater.

Add ... 2 unbeaten eggs, 1 unbeaten egg yolk

Beat ... 200 strokes (same as above)

Put ... ⅓ of batter in a smaller mixing bowl

Add ... ¾ teaspoon cinnamon, ¹/₁₆ teaspoon cloves, ⅜ teaspoon allspice,
      ⅜ teaspoon nutmeg, ¾ tablespoon cocoa to ⅓ of batter

Spoon ... both batters alternately by tablespoonfuls into Spry-coated
      8½″ tube pan

Run ... spatula through batters several times to marble

Bake ... until cake tests done

Cool ... and remove from pans, see inside back cover.

Spread ... Lemon cream Icing (p. 12) on sides and top.




                        Fudge Frosted Layer Cake


    [Illustration: Fudge Frosted Layer Cake]

  Oven temperature: 375°F. (moderately hot)
  Baking time: 25-35 min.
  Yield: 2 square or round 8″ layers

Sift ... 2 cups sifted cake flour, 1⅓ cups sugar, 2½ teaspoons double
      acting baking powder[4], 1 teaspoon salt into mixing bowl

Add ... ½ cup Homogenized Spry

Combine ... 1 cup less 2 tablespoons milk, 1½ teaspoons vanilla

Add ... ⅔ of combined milk and vanilla

Beat ... 200 strokes (2 min. by hand or on mixer at low speed). Scrape
      bowl and spoon or beater.

Add ... remaining milk and vanilla, 2 unbeaten eggs

Beat ... 200 strokes (same as above)

Pour ... into 2 square 8″x8″x2″ Spry-coated pans or 2 round 8″ pans 1¼″
      deep

Bake ... until cake tests done

Cool ... and remove from pans, see inside back cover.

Spread ... Chocolate Fudge Frosting (p. 11) between layers and on top
      and sides.

Serve ... with walnut halves.




                     “Happy Birthday” Coconut Cake


    [Illustration: “Happy Birthday” Coconut Cake]

  Oven temperature: 375°F. (moderately hot)
  Baking time: 25-30 min
  Yield: two 9″ round layers

Sift ... 2¼ cups sifted cake flour, 1½ cups sugar, 2½ teaspoons double
      acting baking powder[5], 1 teaspoon salt into mixing bowl

Add ... ¾ cup Homogenized Spry, ½ cup milk, 1 teaspoon orange extract, ½
      teaspoon almond extract, 1 unbeaten egg

Beat ... 200 strokes (2 min. by hand or on mixer at low speed). Scrape
      bowl and spoon or beater.

Add ... ¼ cup milk, 2 unbeaten eggs

Beat ... 200 strokes (same as above)

Pour ... into 2 round 9″ Sprycoated layer pans 1½″ deep.

Bake ... until cake tests done

Cool ... and remove from pans, see inside back cover

Spread ... Best Seven-Minute Frosting (p. 12) between layers, sprinkle
      with ¼ cup coconut, and spread remaining frosting on sides and top
      of cake.

Pat ... 1 cup coconut onto sides of cake

Write ... Happy Birthday across top of cake with pink frosting. Place
      pink candles in holders around rim of cake.




                         Twin Applesauce Loaves


    [Illustration: Twin Applesauce Loaves]

  Oven temperature: 350°F. (moderate)
  Baking time: 1 hour and 25-35 min.
  Yield: 2 small loaf cakes or 1 large tube cake

Sift ... 2 cups sifted cake flour, 1½ cups sugar, 1½ teaspoons soda, 1½
      teaspoons salt, 2 tablespoons cocoa, ½ teaspoon cinnamon, ½
      teaspoon cloves, ½ teaspoon nutmeg, ½ teaspoon allspice into
      mixing bowl

Add ...       teaspoon cloves, ½ teaspoon nutmeg, ½ teaspoon allspice into ½ 
       teaspoon cloves, ½ teaspoon nutmeg, ½ teaspoon allspice into
cup Homogenized Spry, 1½ cups unsweetened applesauce[6]

Beat ... 200 strokes (2 min. by hand or on mixer at low speed). Scrape
      bowl and spoon or beater.

Add ... 2 unbeaten eggs

Beat ... 200 strokes (same as above)

Stir in ... ¾ cup cut-up dates, ¾ cup chopped raisins, ⅓ cup diced
      citron, ¾ cup chopped nuts

Pour ... into 2 small Sprycoated loaf pans, 4″x 6½″x2¾″ (or into 8½″
      tube pan). On top of 1 loaf, sprinkle mixture of 2 tablespoons
      chopped nuts and 1 tablespoon brown sugar.

Bake ... until cake tests done

Cool ... and remove from pans, see inside back cover.

Spread ... Creamy Vanilla Frosting (p. 12) on sides and top of plain
      loaf.




                        Bonnie Butterscotch Cake


    [Illustration: Bonnie Butterscotch Cake]

  Oven temperature: 375°F. (moderately hot)
  Baking time: 25-35 min.
  Yield: 2 round 9″ layers

Mix ... 1 cup firmly packed light brown sugar, ¼ cup butter or
      margarine, ¼ cup milk in saucepan

Place ... on low heat and bring to boil, stirring constantly. Boil
      gently until a small amount of mixture forms a hard ball in cold
      water (250°F.), stirring often. Remove from heat.

Stir in ... gradually 1¼ cups scalded milk. Cool.

Sift ... 2¾ cups sifted cake flour, 1 cup firmly packed light brown
      sugar, 3½ teaspoons double acting baking powder[7], ¾ teaspoon
      salt into mixing bowl

Add ... ⅔ cup Homogenized Spry, ¾ of the cooled butterscotch mixture, 1
      unbeaten egg, 1 teaspoon vanilla

Beat ... 250 strokes (2½ min. by hand or on mixer at low speed). Scrape
      bowl and spoon or beater.

Add ... remaining butterscotch mixture, 2 unbeaten eggs

Beat ... 250 strokes (same as above)

Pour ... into 2 round 9″ Sprycoated layer pans 1½″ deep

Bake ... until cake tests done

Cool ... and remove from pans, see inside back cover.

Spread ... Butterscotch Frosting (p. 12) between layers. Sprinkle with ¼
      cup chopped pecans. Spread remaining frosting on sides and top.

Decorate ... with pecan halves.




                         Triple-Tier Party Cake


    [Illustration: Triple-Tier Party Cake]

  Oven temperature: 375°F. (moderately hot)
  Baking time: 22-27 min.
  Yield: three 9″ round layers

Sift ... 2¾ cups sifted cake flour, 1¾ cups sugar, 2 teaspoons double
      acting baking powder[8], 1½ teaspoons salt into mixing bowl

Add ... 1 cup Homogenized Spry, ¾ cup milk, 1 teaspoon almond extract, 1
      teaspoon orange extract, 1 unbeaten egg

Beat ... 200 strokes (2 min. by hand or on mixer at low speed). Scrape
      bowl and spoon or beater.

Add ... 2 unbeaten eggs, 1 unbeaten egg yolk

Beat ... 200 strokes (same as above)

Stir in ... 1 cup finely cut coconut

Pour ... into 3 round 9″ Sprycoated layer pans 1¼″ deep

Bake ... until cake tests done

Cool ... and remove from pans, see inside back cover.

Spread ... Fantasia Frosting (p. 12) between layers and on sides and
      top, making graceful little peaks.




                           Hawaiian Lei Cake


    [Illustration: Hawaiian Lei Cake]

  Oven temperature: 360°F. (moderate)
  Baking time: 20-25 min.
  Yield: two 9″ round layers

Sift ... 2¼ cups sifted cake flour, 1½ cups sugar, 4 teaspoons double
      acting baking powder[9], 1 teaspoon salt into mixing bowl

Add ... ½ cup Homogenized Spry, ¾ cup milk, 1 teaspoon vanilla, 1
      teaspoon orange extract

Beat ... 200 strokes (2 min. by hand or on mixer at low speed). Scrape
      bowl and spoon or beater.

Add ... 4 unbeaten egg whites, ¼ cup milk

Beat ... 200 strokes (same as above)

Pour ... into 2 round 9″ Sprycoated layer pans 1½″ deep

Bake ... until cake tests done

Cool ... and remove from pans, see inside back cover.

Spread ... Waikiki Frosting (p. 11) between layers and on sides and top
      of cake.

Decorate ... with a “lei” made by arranging bits of pineapple, candied
      orange peel, and citron around top of cake.




                     Marshmallow Devil’s Food Cake


    [Illustration: Marshmallow Devil’s Food Cake]

  Oven temperature: 350°F. (moderate)
  Baking time: 40-50 min.
  Yield: 1 large oblong loaf cake

Sift ... 1½ cups sifted cake flour, 1¼ cups sugar, ½ cup cocoa, 1¼
      teaspoons soda, ¼ teaspoon cream of tartar, 1 teaspoon salt into
      mixing bowl

Add ... ⅔ cup Homogenized Spry, ¾ cup milk, 1 teaspoon vanilla

Beat ... 200 strokes (2 min. by hand or on mixer at low speed). Scrape
      bowl and spoon or beater.

Add ... ¼ cup milk, 2 unbeaten eggs

Beat ... 200 strokes (same as above)

Pour ... into oblong 8″x12″x2″ Sprycoated pan

Bake ... until cake tests done

Cool ... and remove from pan, see inside back cover.

Spread ... Marshmallow Frosting (p. 11) on sides and top, using short
      strokes to create attractive irregular effect.

Mark ... with knife into squares

Decorate ... alternate squares with 2 pecan halves.




                                   10
                           Luscious Frostings
            made to glorify the 10 Cakes Husbands like best


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


                        Chocolate Fudge Frosting

Combine in a saucepan 3 oz. chocolate, cut fine, 2¼ cups sugar, ¾ cup
milk, 6 tablespoons Homogenized Spry, 3 tablespoons butter or margarine,
1½ tablespoons corn sirup, and ¼ teaspoon salt. Bring slowly to a full
rolling boil, stirring constantly, and boil _briskly_ for 2 min. (On a
rainy or very humid day, boil mixture 2¼ min.) Cool to lukewarm, add 1½
teaspoons vanilla and beat until creamy and thick enough to spread.
Yield: frosting for tops and sides of two square 8″ layers.


                          Prune Whip Frosting

Mix thoroughly in top of double boiler 2 unbeaten egg whites, 1 cup
brown sugar, firmly packed, ½ cup granulated sugar, ⅛ teaspoon salt, and
5 tablespoons unsweetened prune juice. Put over rapidly boiling water
and beat constantly with rotary egg beater until mixture will hold a
peak (7 min.). Remove from hot water, and beat until cool and thick
enough to spread. Stir in 2 teaspoons lemon juice, 6 cooked prunes,
drained and cut in small pieces, 2 tablespoons almonds, blanched,
chopped, and toasted. (Optional: Frosted cake may be sprinkled with 2
more tablespoons of almonds.) Yield: frosting for tops and sides of two
8″ layers.


                            Waikiki Frosting

Mix thoroughly in top of double boiler 2 unbeaten egg whites, 1½ cups
sugar, 5 tablespoons canned pineapple sirup (drained from crushed
pineapple), 1 teaspoon light corn sirup and ⅛ teaspoon salt. Set over
rapidly boiling water and beat constantly with rotary egg beater until
mixture will hold a peak (7 min.). Remove from hot water, add ½ teaspoon
vanilla, ½ teaspoon orange extract and beat till cool and thick enough
to spread. Fold in ½ cup crushed pineapple. Yield: frosting for tops and
sides of two 9″ layers.


                          Marshmallow Frosting

Mix thoroughly in top of double boiler 2 unbeaten egg whites, 1½ cups
sugar, 3 tablespoons light corn sirup, 4 tablespoons water, ¼ teaspoon
cream of tartar, and ⅛ teaspoon salt. Set over rapidly boiling water and
beat constantly with rotary egg beater until mixture will hold a peak (7
min.). Remove from hot water, add 1 teaspoon vanilla, and beat until
cool and thick enough to spread. Just before spreading, fold in 1 cup
marshmallows, cut in quarters. Yield: frosting for top and sides of 8″ x
12″ x 2″ loaf.


                       Best Seven-minute Frosting

Mix thoroughly in top of double boiler 2 unbeaten egg whites, 1½ cups
sugar, 5 tablespoons cold water, 1 teaspoon light corn sirup and ⅛
teaspoon salt. Set over rapidly boiling water and beat constantly with
rotary egg beater until mixture will hold a peak (7 min.). Remove from
hot water, add ½ teaspoon orange extract, ½ teaspoon almond extract and
2 marshmallows, cut in pieces. Beat until cool and thick enough to
spread. Yield: frosting for tops and sides of two 9″ layers.


                          Tawny Satin Frosting

Mix thoroughly in top of double boiler 2 unbeaten egg whites, 1 cup
granulated sugar, ½ cup brown sugar, firmly packed, 4 tablespoons water,
3 tablespoons dark corn sirup, ¼ teaspoon cream of tartar, and ⅛
teaspoon salt. Set over rapidly boiling water and beat constantly with
rotary egg beater until mixture will hold a peak (7 min.). Remove from
hot water, add 1 teaspoon vanilla, and beat until cool and thick enough
to spread. Yield: frosting for tops and sides of two 9″ layers.


                           Lemon Cream Icing

In a mixing bowl blend 2 tablespoons Homogenized Spry, 1 tablespoon
butter or margarine, ⅛ teaspoon salt, ¼ teaspoon grated lemon rind and 1
tablespoon lemon juice. Beat in ½ cup sifted confectioners’ sugar. Add 5
tablespoons scalded light cream and 2½ cups sifted confectioners’ sugar,
alternately, beating well after each addition. Tint delicately with a
few drops of yellow coloring, if desired. Yield: frosting for top and
sides of 8½″ tube cake.


                           Fantasia Frosting

Mix thoroughly in top of double boiler 2 unbeaten egg whites, 1½ cups
sugar, 4 tablespoons cold water, 3 tablespoons light corn sirup and ⅛
teaspoon salt. Set over rapidly boiling water and beat constantly with
rotary egg beater until mixture will hold a peak (7 min.). Remove from
hot water, add 1 teaspoon vanilla, ½ teaspoon almond extract, and beat
until cool and thick enough to spread. Fold in 1 cup mixed candied
cherries, citron, and dates, cut very fine, and 1 cup pecans, chopped
fine and toasted. Yield: frosting for sides and tops of three 9″ layers.


                         Butterscotch Frosting

In a saucepan mix well 2 cups light brown sugar, firmly packed, 1 cup
granulated sugar, 2 tablespoons light corn sirup, ¾ cup milk, ¼ cup
Homogenized Spry, ¼ cup butter or margarine and ¼ teaspoon salt. Bring
slowly to a full rolling boil, stirring constantly, and boil _briskly_ 2
minutes. (Boil 2½ min. on a rainy or very humid day.) Cool to lukewarm,
add 1 teaspoon vanilla, and beat until creamy and thick enough to
spread. Yield: frosting for tops and sides of two 9″ layers.


                        Creamy Vanilla Frosting

Blend together 1 tablespoon Homogenized Spry, 1 tablespoon butter or
margarine, ¾ teaspoon vanilla, and ¼ teaspoon salt. Beat in ½ cup sifted
confectioners’ sugar. Add, alternately, 1½ cups sifted confectioners’
sugar and 3 tablespoons scalded light cream, beating well after each
addition. Yield: frosting for top and sides of 4″ x 6½″ x 2¾″ loaf.




                            Now for the fun!


    [Illustration: _Frosting Tips_]

  _Here are the crowning touches—the simple, easy ways to add glamour
                             to your cakes_

Designing and executing a pretty decorative finish for a handsome cake
is pure fun—and certainly worth the trouble in the extra pleasure that
it gives. Do it when you won’t be disturbed and remember planning is
half the battle. If the plan is elaborate, draw it on paper first and
then mark the important spots with toothpicks set lightly in place after
the cake is frosted. They will serve as guides and insure even spacing.

Be sure cake is thoroughly cold (see inside back cover) before starting
to frost. Brush off loose crumbs and trim off over-browned or ragged
edges. Have decorations ready to use.


                          How to frost a cake

For layer cakes: Turn the bottom layer from the rack onto the cake
plate, bottom side up, and spread some of the frosting with a spatula
evenly over the surface. Top it with the second layer, bottom side down,
with edges even. Frost sides of cake first, using light up-and-down
strokes and bringing the frosting up and just over the top rim of the
cake. Pile the remaining frosting on top and spread out to rim, making
graceful swirls or soft ridges according to the type of frosting. With a
seven-minute frosting, attractive little peaks can be made by lifting
the frosting gently with a spatula. For certain types of decoration,
like lettering, a smooth frosted top is best. Avoid “puttering” with
frosting, as overworking ruins its appearance.

                            * * * * * * * *

For tube or loaf cake: Place cake top or bottom side up, as preferred.
Frost sides, then top, following suggestions for frosting layer cakes.


                       To adorn the frosted cake

For decorating, use good-to-eat ingredients, chosen to go with the cake
in color, texture, and character. Let the decorations be simple but
artistic and effective. For example, the ingredients commonly found in
the kitchen cupboard make beautiful decorations when used correctly.

Coconut—For an all-over sprinkle of coconut, use the canned moist
shredded coconut with long glistening white shreds. Pat it on while the
frosting is still soft. To tint, add a few drops of food coloring, then
rub between the palms of the hands to color it evenly. For a rainbow
effect, tint separate lots of coconut pink, green, yellow, and violet,
and then mix them. To tint and flavor, rub 1 cup coconut with 8 fine-cut
maraschino cherries or with the grated rind of 1 orange. For some cakes,
golden toasted coconut is effective.

To toast coconut, spread a thin layer in a shallow pan, toast in
moderate oven (350°F.) until a delicate brown, stirring often to toast
evenly.

                             * * * * * * *

    [Illustration: {decorated cake frosting}]

Chocolate—Striking effects can be obtained on a frosted cake with melted
chocolate (see directions for Chocolate Rapture Cake, p. 1). For
decorative dribbles or lettering, melt together over hot water ½ oz.
unsweetened chocolate and ½ teaspoon Spry. Cool before using. For enough
chocolate to cover the entire top of the cake and let it drip down the
sides in interesting icicle formations, double these quantities. Melted
chocolate can also be used for lettering as in “Happy Birthday”
treatment. White frostings or delicately tinted pink or green mint
frostings are especially pretty with melted chocolate decorations.
Halloween black cats or witches for the top of a frosted cake can be
made as follows: Draw or trace an outline of the desired shape on waxed
paper, fill in the outline with melted chocolate. Put in refrigerator to
harden, loosen from paper, and place on cake. Make other designs
similarly.

    [Illustration: {decorated cake frosting}]

A lacy filigree effect can be made on a white-frosted cake as follows:
Melt ½ oz. chocolate with ½ teaspoon Spry. Mark 5 circles around top of
cake and pour in chocolate. With a pointed knife, make 8 evenly spaced
strokes toward the edge of the cake, then between them make 8 upward
strokes toward the center, to get web effect (see illustration).

                            * * * * * * * *

Thin curls or shavings of sweetened or unsweetened chocolate make
interesting decoration. They can be made with a vegetable peeler or a
sharp knife. Semisweet chocolate bits can be used as push-ins on a soft
frosting to form letters or designs.

                            * * * * * * * *

Nuts—Use perfect walnut or pecan halves for making interesting patterns
on frosted cakes, pressing them in while the frosting is soft. Nuts can
be tipped or tilted into frosting with artistic effect. For making nut
borders, lines, or designs, cut the nuts in pieces; do not chop the nuts
as this makes unattractive “dust.” Brazil nuts can be “curled” by
softening them first in hot water, then cutting in very thin slices or
“curls.” Blanched almonds can be used for making patterns; sprinkles of
toasted slivered almonds are attractive on beige-colored frostings.
Sprinkling the sides of the cake with chopped nuts gives an attractive
finish.

    [Illustration: {decorated cake frosting}]

Fruits and Peels—Fruits (canned, candied, dried, or fresh) can be used
endlessly. Maraschino cherries are especially good for Valentine,
holiday, or party cakes. Cherry halves can be cut to resemble hearts or
flowers, then placed around the rim of a frosted cake. Lengthwise cherry
slices can be arranged to form attractive poinsettias.

Pineapple can be tinted with food coloring, or cut up and arranged in
simple patterns with green citron; crushed pineapple, citron, and orange
peel can be used to make an unusual “flower lei” (p. 9). At
Christmastime, charming holly wreaths and Christmas trees can be
fashioned on frosted cakes with bits of red and green cherries and green
citron. Citron can be colored bright green with green coloring.
Streamers of fine-cut dates, figs, or raisins are pretty on some frosted
cakes, or definite patterns can be made with larger pieces if preferred.

    [Illustration: {decorated cake frosting}]

Candies—Sprinkles of silver or gold dragées are beautiful on cakes with
fluffy white or pastel frostings. Dragées can be used to outline
interlocking hearts for a bridal shower, or to spell out “Happy
Birthday.” Gumdrops, cut in small pieces, can be sprinkled on a white
frosted cake for sparkling color, or arranged to outline a pattern like
a green shamrock for St. Patrick’s Day.

                            * * * * * * * *

Lollipops, canes, all-day-suckers, or stick candy can be crushed and
used as gay color on the frosted sides and for lettering on top of the
cake. Contrasting colors are pretty.

    [Illustration: {decorated cake frosting}]

Those round flat orange patties can be used as jack-o’-lanterns by
making little faces on them with melted chocolate and arranging them on
a chocolate frosted cake for Halloween. Chocolate candy animals standing
lightly on frosted cupcakes delight the children.

Tiny colored sugar flowers can be bought in the 5-and-10 cent store and
these are pretty arranged on cakes with fluffy white or pastel
frostings. For “extra-special” cakes you can buy candied violets or rose
petals to make wreaths of dainty flowers on a frosted cake.

You’ve probably had thoughts of your own as you were reading—of other
materials and other ways to use them. Go to it! Experimenting is half
the fun. Happy decorating!


                         Fancy Frosting Effects

These call for special tools, “boughten” or homemade, and special
frostings. Cake-decorating sets, consisting of a bag or “gun” and
assorted tubes can be purchased in housewares departments. They can be
used for making flowers, designs, or lettering on special-occasion
cakes.

If you haven’t a tube set, a paper cone for decorating can be easily
made. Just cut a 6” square of waxed paper and roll it into a cone. Spoon
in the frosting, filling the cone not more than half full. Fold down the
top edges and cut off the tip at the bottom to make a tiny opening for
the frosting to come through. Then take the cone in left hand, and grasp
its top with right hand, bringing thumb down to about the center.
Pressing down with the thumb forces the frosting down to the tip of the
cone and out through the hole, while your hand directs the movement of
the cone. With a little practice, lovely effects can be obtained.

The best frosting for this purpose is Ornamental Frosting because it is
very stiff, squeezes out ideally, and sets up firm on the cake.


                 _How to make your own Cake Decorator_

    [Illustration: Make a waxed paper cone for each color icing you plan
    to use (see instructions above).]


                          Ornamental Frosting

            (_To use in cake-decorating set or paper cone_)

  2¼ cups confectioners’ sugar
  ⅓ teaspoon cream of tartar
  2 egg whites, unbeaten
  ⅓ teaspoon vanilla

Sift sugar and cream of tartar through very fine sieve.... Add egg
whites and mix with slotted spoon or wire whip.... Continue to mix for
3-4 min.... Add vanilla.... Beat 8-20 min. longer with spoon or 3-4 min.
on mixer at high speed.... Frosting should be so stiff that a sharp
ridge is held when the tip of a knife is drawn through.... Frosting may
be tinted with a few drops of food coloring, if desired.... Yield: 1½
cups.


                             Spry Pan-Coat

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Prepare cake pans for baking by rubbing them with Spry Pan-coat.

Mix ... ½ cup Homogenized Spry ¼ cup all-purpose flour

Use ... for “greasing” cake pans, baking sheets, etc. Gives even, brown
      crust—prevents sticking.

Store ... Pan-coat in covered dish in cupboard for handy use—can be made
      ahead and stored till wanted. Need not be refrigerated.


                    How to tell when a cake is done

The cake recipes in this booklet specify a baking range in minutes
within which the cake should finish baking and be “done.” However,
before removing the cake from the oven, test it for doneness by touching
the top of the cake in the center lightly with finger. If the cake
springs back leaving no impression, the cake is done. Also, insert a
toothpick or wire cake tester in the center, and if it comes out clean,
the cake is done. If any dough adheres to the tester, longer baking is
needed.

    [Illustration: Cakes come out of pans readily with Spry Pan-coat (p.
    16) and proper cooling.]


                       Care of cake after baking

When cake has finished baking, remove it from the oven and put it on a
wire cake rack, in the pan. This permits circulation of air around it
and insures even cooling. Let it stand 10-15 min. Then gently loosen the
cake from the sides of the pan with a spatula or knife, working
carefully to avoid breaking edge. Place another rack on top of the pan,
turn over, and lift off the pan. Then turn cake right side up on rack to
finish cooling. When the cake is thoroughly cold, it is ready to be
frosted. For frosting recipes and frosting suggestions, see pp. 11-16.




            You can bake a BETTER Cake with Homogenized Spry


    [Illustration: Homogenized Spry]

Dip your spoon into Homogenized Spry—see how much lighter and fluffier
it is than other shortenings—how easy to work with. It’s pre-creamed,
easier to blend with dry ingredients. And Spry is the only kind of
shortening that is specially made to mix with the liquids your cake
recipes call for. So you can see why Spry, with this special
blending-action, makes any cake a better cake. You can count on it every
time—you’ll bake a better cake, be a better cook, with Homogenized Spry.




                               Footnotes


[1]With a tartrate baking powder, use 1 teaspoon.

[2]With a tartrate baking powder, use 3½ teaspoons.

[3]With a tartrate baking powder, use 3 teaspoons.

[4]With a tartrate baking powder, use 4 teaspoons.

[5]With a tartrate baking powder, use 4 teaspoons.

[6]If sweetened applesauce is used, use only 1¼ cups sugar.

[7]With a tartrate baking powder, use 5½ teaspoons.

[8]With a tartrate baking powder, use 3 teaspoons.

[9]With a tartrate baking powder, use 5½ teaspoons.


    [Illustration: Back cover]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's 10 Cakes Husbands Like Best, by Anonymous



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 10 CAKES HUSBANDS LIKE BEST: FROM SPRY'S RECIPE ROUND-UP ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.