Produced by Martin Pettit and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)






ADVISORY BEN

E. V. LUCAS




_Other Books of_ E. V. LUCAS


ENTERTAINMENTS

GENEVRA'S MONEY
ROSE AND ROSE
VERENA IN THE MIDST
THE VERMILION BOX
LANDMARKS
LISTENER'S LURE
MR. INGLESIDE
OVER BEMERTON'S29
LONDON LAVENDER


ESSAYS

LUCK OF THE YEAR
GIVING AND RECEIVING
ROVING EAST AND ROVING WEST
ADVENTURES AND ENTHUSIASMS
CLOUD AND SILVER
A BOSWELL OF BAGHDAD
TWIX EAGLE AND DOVE
THE PHANTOM JOURNAL
LOITERER'S HARVEST
ONE DAY AND ANOTHER
FIRESIDE AND SUNSHINE
CHARACTER AND COMEDY
OLD LAMPS FOR NEW


TRAVEL

A WANDERER IN VENICE
A WANDERER IN PARIS
A WANDERER IN LONDON
A WANDERER IN HOLLAND
A WANDERER IN FLORENCE
MORE WANDERINGS IN LONDON
HIGHWAYS AND BYWAYS IN SUSSEX


EDITED WORKS

THE WORKS OF CHARLES AND MARY LAMB
THE HAUSFRAU RAMPANT


ANTHOLOGIES

THE OPEN ROAD
THE FRIENDLY TOWN
HER INFINITE VARIETY
GOOD COMPANY
THE GENTLEST ART
THE SECOND POST
THE BEST OF LAMB
REMEMBER LOUVAIN


BOOKS FOR CHILDREN

THE SLOWCOACH
ANNE'S TERRIBLE GOOD NATURE
A BOOK OF VERSES FOR CHILDREN
ANOTHER BOOK OF VERSES FOR CHILDREN
RUNAWAYS AND CASTAWAYS
FORGOTTEN STORIES OF LONG AGO
MORE FORGOTTEN STORIES
THE "ORIGINAL VERSES" OF ANN AND JANE TAYLOR


BIOGRAPHY

THE LIFE OF CHARLES LAMB
A SWAN AND HER FRIENDS
THE BRITISH SCHOOL
THE HAMBLEDON MEN


SELECTED WRITINGS

A LITTLE OF EVERYTHING
HARVEST HOME
VARIETY LANE
MIXED VINTAGES




ADVISORY BEN

_A Story_

BY
E. V. LUCAS

[Illustration: Logo]

NEW      YORK
GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY




COPYRIGHT, 1924,
BY GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY

[Illustration: Logo]


ADVISORY BEN
--A--
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




ADVISORY BEN




I


In the lives of all, even the least enterprising or adventurous,
moments now and then arrive when a decision has to be made; and our
demeanour at such times throws a strong light upon our character. Many
of us postpone action, either sheltering behind a natural reluctance to
do anything emphatic, or feeling that the Fates ought to arrange our
affairs for us. After all, it is their _métier_.

But my Ben was not like that. My Ben (to give her her full name, Benita
Staveley) was instantly practical, and her disapproval of the pastoral
process known as letting the grass grow under your feet was intense.
All her actions were prompt, without, however, coming within the zone
of impulse. Even at twenty-two she envisaged a situation with perfect
clearness, and knew her mind; but why I should mention twenty-two as
though it were a tender age, I can't explain, except as the result of
pure want of thought. To say of a man that he is twenty-two is often
merely to accuse him of callowness; but in a woman twenty-two can be
maturity in everything but actual physique; and this is especially
the case with those who, like Ben, even from young girlhood have been
relied upon by father, mother, brothers and sisters to solve their
difficulties and make things smooth for them.

Ever since I have known Ben--and her mother and I were playfellows half
a century and more ago--she has been a mixture of factotum and oracle,
yet without ever for a moment declining into a drudge or losing gaiety.
A Cinderella perhaps; but a Cinderella who went to the ball without
any supernatural assistance; a Cinderella with a laugh and a retort;
a Cinderella who won respect and as much chocolate as she wanted,
both from those within the home and out of it. Not a few boxes, for
instance, from my own hand.

But there had, as yet, been no glass slipper and no Prince, unless, of
course, you count poor Tommy Clinton as one: Tommy, who has been coming
home every summer from his billet in Madeira for the past six years
with two mastering motives to impel him--one being the wish to carry
off something, either in singles or doubles, at Wimbledon, and the
other to propose again to Ben--and so far has had no success in either
enterprise.

Personally I am glad that she didn't marry Tommy, for he takes his
defeats too sweetly, almost indeed as though he preferred them to
victories. Such plastic and easy-going youths, although they may be
agreeable enough during the time of courtship, and as dancing partners,
or even as husbands for a little while, never grow into the sterner
stuff that our Bens require, desire and deserve. But girls who have the
Atlas habit run, of course, great risks of attracting the men who want
to be treated as though they were the world.

Under the circumstances it is a little odd that Ben, save for the
punctual, if casual, annual attack of Tommy Clinton, was unpursued; but
one has to remember that Colonel Staveley did not like young men about
the house. Not that that makes any difference when passion rules, for
we know how Love treats locksmiths; but at the time this story opens
Ben was heart-free. She might appear indeed to strangers to look like
becoming one of those attractive girls who somehow or other seem to be
insufficiently attractive ever to marry. But I never thought so. She
had, however, no doubt, missed the first matrimonial train, the one
that conveys to the altar carriage-loads of immature, high-spirited
couples on the edge of the twenties. Other trains come along later, but
the service is not so good.




II


When a girl has been keeping house for her father for three or four
years and her father then (although sixty-three) marries again, her
position is not easy, nor does it demand a blind belief in all the
malignant tradition that surrounds stepmothers to admit this. As a
matter of fact, Colonel Staveley's new wife would probably have been
happier if her stepdaughter had remained in the house. Indeed, I am
sure of it, for she is neither a jealous woman nor a meddlesome; and
Ben's knowledge of her home and of its master's ways would have made
life more simple, while the girl herself would have been a companion
when that master was playing bridge at his club or informing such of
his fellow-members as would still listen to him what the Government--if
it had a grain of sense--would do.

For some time--we are now in the year 1921--Ben and her father had had
the house to themselves, for her mother was dead. This lady, I ought to
say, had displayed something like genius in the ordered way in which
at definite intervals, and with discreet alternations of sex, she had
put her children into the world; first a girl and then a boy, and then
a girl and then a boy, and so on--beginning with Alicia as long ago as
1883, and then Cecil in 1887, and then Merrill in 1890, and then Guy in
1894, until her youngest daughter's turn to arrive came in 1899, and
Toby's, her youngest son's in 1902, and the tale was complete.

Of these six, when Colonel Staveley married again, only Ben was at
home. Alicia had become Mrs. Bertrand Lyle and the mother of two boys
and was now a widow; Cecil, who was a soldier in India, had married
a French girl and was childless; Merrill had married a Hampshire
vicar and was childless; Guy, also a soldier in India, was engaged to
Melanie Ames, a friend of Ben's; and as for Toby, he was nominally
imbibing learning at Oxford, but, like so many undergraduates of my
acquaintance, seemed more often to be imbibing other things in London.
I don't mean to excess, but dancing is a thirsty form of industry, and
late hours have been known to lead to early restoratives.

Ever since Mrs. Staveley's death, the Colonel had counted on Ben, who
was then eighteen, for everything that would promote his comfort. He
knew--none better--that the first essential of a selfish man is an
entourage of unselfish people. And of these Ben was the chief. It must
not be thought that the Colonel was a bully; rather, a martinet. He
suffered from a too early retirement, aggravated by his wife's meekness
and complacency, and as he had not thrown himself into any amateur
work, and was, by nature, indolent and conversational, he was left with
far too much leisure in which to detect domestic blemishes. A pedant
for routine, his eye, when it came to any kind of disorder or novelty
of arrangement, was like a gun. There was one place and one only for
every article in the house, beginning with the hat-stand in the hall;
and his first instinct, if not thought, on entering his front door was
to look for something out of position. And so onwards, through whatever
rooms he passed.

When he descried a fault it was, formerly, his wife, and latterly Ben,
who was court-martialled; and not the actual offender. This probably,
while fortunate for that person, was even more fortunate for the
Colonel, who might otherwise have been without cooks and parlourmaids
most of his life, for servants often put up a better resistance to
martinets than the martinets' own flesh and blood. But whereas Mrs.
Staveley had been reduced too often to tears, Ben bore the assaults
with a courageous or stoical humour.

"I can't conceive," the Colonel had exclaimed wrathfully, on the very
day before this story begins, "why on earth people can't leave my
umbrella alone."

"But it's there all right," Ben replied. "I noticed it in the stand a
few minutes ago."

"Yes," he snapped, "but some idiot has rolled it up. That new girl, I
suppose. I thought she looked an officious fool the moment I saw her."

"Well, father," said Ben, "if she did roll it up, it was purely through
excess of zeal, that's all; and don't let us be too hard on excess of
zeal in these times, when almost everyone is so slack."

"But what about her being too hard on my umbrella?" the Colonel
demanded. "That's what I complain of. If I leave it unrolled--which I
did very carefully and on purpose--it's no business of anyone else to
roll it up. And no woman can roll an umbrella, anyway. It's an art."

"All right, father," said Ben, "it shan't happen again."

"I hope not," the Colonel barked back, "and it wouldn't have happened
this time if you'd kept Atkinson. I can't think why you let her go."

"My dear father," said Ben, "I've told you again and again. She left
in order to be married. Surely a girl must be allowed to marry if she
wants."

"Pooh!" said the Colonel, with infinite scorn. "Marriage!"

It was on the next day that he announced his own engagement, through
which Ben was driven to come to a decision as to her career.




III


When Belle Lorimer, the wealthy, merry, or at any rate not lachrymose,
widow of Vincent Lorimer (of Lorimer and Lorimer, the stockbrokers),
agreed to the Colonel's suggestion that together they should tie a
second knot, the Colonel was probably assuming that Ben's capable
control and intimate acquaintance with his needs and moods would still
be available. Never an imaginative man, he had probably given no
thought whatever to his daughter's temperament and character; enough
that she was his daughter and he her father, that she was solicitous,
remembering, and, above all, cheerful, and that she rarely provoked
even the semblance of a scene. There had been scenes with her mother
too often: the result less of mismanagement on Mrs. Staveley's part
than on the Colonel's tendency to indulge an exacting nature to the
full coupled with the advantage that the position of husband too
often confers. For husbands are not merely husbands: they are also
contemporaries; and as the predominant partners they have the great
pull of beginning right. Daughters are of another generation, with
fewer obligations, and the power actually to rebel, or, if it comes
to the worst, bolt. Wives have stood at the altar and made promises;
wives have brought money with them, and marriage settlements often
very adroitly drawn up in the widower's interest; wives are too old to
be influenced by detrimental new ideas. But daughters are different:
daughters have made no promises, possess no financial resources, and
are painfully susceptible to revolutionary notions. They are capable
even of asking such upheaving questions as, "Why do I owe any duty to a
father I didn't choose?"

The Colonel may have lacked imagination, but some self-protective
instinct had worked in him to give Ben an easier time than her
mother, poor woman, had ever had. But sweet as was Ben's nature, she
was modernly conscious of certain duties and loyalties to one's own
individuality, and, even before she came to talk to me about it, had
quite determined that now was her opportunity to strike out a line
for herself. And luckily she could to some extent afford it, for
in addition to a little nest-egg consisting of the accumulation of
interest in her minority, she now had, in common with her sisters
and brothers, an income of two hundred a year from her maternal
grandmother, the terms of that shrewd old lady's last will and
testament being the culmination of a long series of indignities which,
in the Colonel's opinion, she had put upon him. Surely a daughter
(named Mrs. Staveley), he had said, should come before grandchildren?
But the dead hand distributed more wisely.




IV


Alone one cannot do much on two hundred a year, but by pooling expenses
two persons can exist without squalor on four hundred, especially if
there is also a reserve in the bank, and this was Ben's idea. Her first
step would be to join forces with her friend, Melanie Ames, to whom her
brother Guy, now in India, had been engaged for the past three or four
years, and share her rooms on Campden Hill--nice rooms too, right at
the top, near the reservoir tower.

Melanie, who had also two hundred a year, was working at the moment as
secretary to a Harley Street doctor; made his appointments; answered
the telephone; saw to it (I suppose) that no current numbers of
any illustrated papers ever got into the waiting-room (for someone
must be in charge to maintain this inflexible custom); sent out all
his accounts and as many receipts as were necessary; occasionally
transacted commissions for the doctor's wife, who rarely came to town
but did not like to think of the Sales going on without any of the
doctor's fees to assist them; and now and then, in the summer, spent
Sunday with the family at their house at Weybridge, where there was an
excellent hard court. For this she received a salary of four pounds
a week, which, added to her private income, enabled Miss Ames to add
butter to her bread as a regular habit and, in her own phrase, "On the
top of the stearic matter now and then to superimpose a little jam, old
dear."

In whatever way Ben was to augment her own private income, it certainly
would not be by acting as any doctor's secretary. She felt herself to
be more restless, more creative, more managing than that. Her nature
demanded the things of the moment and constant activity, and it would
gall her to have to suppress anything that was up to date. But as to
what she was going to do, she had not yet a glimmering. The first thing
was to transfer herself to those nice rooms and Melanie's comforting,
languid society, and it was during the Colonel's protracted and lavish
honeymoon (which the late Vincent Lorimer paid for) in the South of
France that Ben took down the water-colours and photographs in her
sitting-room in the great obsolete house in Hyde Park Gardens, with its
myriad stairs and no lift, and, with such furniture and books as were
hers, moved to Aubrey Walk.

She then paid a long-promised visit to the country; and it was while
she was staying there--with the Fred Lintots in Devonshire--that her
great idea came to her. Like most of the best ideas, it came not with
concentration and anxiety, but in a flash, and, also like most of the
best ideas, it was the result of chance. I can refer to it with some
authority because I was a fellow-guest and was in, so to speak, at the
birth.

An American visitor being expected, the laws of hospitality (as well as
those of his own country) decreed that a cocktail-shaker was essential.
But there was none, nor could any shopkeeper within a radius of many
miles produce one. No doubt, civilization having made inroads even
on the desert, such articles might have been found on the sideboard
of more than one Dartmoor mansion; but behind a counter, no; and the
unfortunate New Yorker with his (alleged) vision of England as a
promised land flowing with gin and whisky seemed to be in danger of
heartbreak.

"What we who live in the depths of the country all need," said Mrs.
Lintot, "is a London agent. Someone to do little jobs like this for
us. I would cheerfully give five pounds a year to have a call on the
services of anyone who would undertake London commissions for me. If I
knew anyone like that, I could telegraph and have that shaker and all
the nasty ingredients for cocktails here by the evening train."

It was then that a brain wave swept over me.

"If you will tell me the nearest telephone," I said, "I will arrange it
through the hall porter at the club," and I did so.

It was in the course of our conversation on the way back from this
telephoning errand, on which Ben had accompanied me, that her
future was practically decided: she would herself become the London
representative of the Mrs. Fred Lintots of the country. Many other
duties in excess of this one came to be hers, as we shall see; but
the germ of her activities in the little business in which I have
the honour to be an obscure partner was the difficulty set up by the
absent shaker. The Apostle James in his Epistle asks us to behold how
great a matter a little fire kindleth, and the minute origins of deeds
that shape our ends have always been a source of interest to me; but
I never thought that the lack of such an article as a cocktail-shaker
in Devonshire would lead either to my speculating in business with my
old playmate's youngest daughter or drive me to become its historian.
And here, although it is outside the scope proper of this narrative,
it may be stated, as yet another example of the caprices of this
illogical world, that when the American arrived he was found to be a
life-abstainer.




V


Things on this planet are always happening at the same time; and it
must follow (since it is only through meetings that the machinery is
assembled which makes the world continue to exist) that, although
parallels or divergences are the rule, now and then persons
simultaneously start out upon lines of action which in due course
arrive at the same point. It is fortunate that those persons are
unaware of what the gods are doing with them. Life is not such fun that
we can afford to dispense with the unexpected.

It chanced that at the very moment when Ben and I were discussing Mrs.
Lintot's scheme at Dartmoor, Mr. John Harford, in the garden of Laycock
Manor, was informing his startled mother that he had decided to chuck
the law and open a second-hand book shop.

Mrs. Harford was properly horrified. The Harfords so far had been able
to avoid trade.

"But this isn't trade," said her son. "This is a lark."

"Do you call it a lark," his mother inquired, "to be covered with
dust--for there's nothing so dusty as old books, and very likely to
catch horrible diseases--for there are no germ carriers like old books
either? And"--she went on, before he could reply--"do you call it a
lark to have to bargain with customers, because no one ever gives as
much for an old book as it is marked? Even I know that. That's not my
notion of a lark, anyway. And you'll have to start early, and leave
late, and your health will go, and your nice looks, and all the money
spent on your legal career will be wasted, and all the money you are
going to put into this absurd business will be wasted too. By the way,
where is that money coming from?"

"I was thinking of you, darling," said her son.

"Of me! Is the boy mad?" she inquired of the flowerbeds, the trees and
the universe at large. "Do you seriously think that, feeling as I do
about this offensive shop, I am going to help you to open it?"

"Yes, darling," said Jack. "And it won't be quite so costly as you
think," he added, "because I'm not going into it alone. I've got a
partner. Who do you think is joining me?"

"I haven't the faintest notion," Mrs. Harford replied. "But I hope it's
an honest man or you'll be robbed. You're as much fitted to run an old
book shop alone as I am to--to--well, these are the kind of sentences
no one ought ever to begin. One used to say 'to fly' once, but everyone
flies now, so there's nothing in it. But you know what I mean. Who is
this partner, anyhow?"

"Patrick," said Jack.

"Patrick! Do you mean Mr. St. Quentin?"

"Of course. He's mad about it. And he's got some capital too."

"Well," said Mrs. Harford, "if Mr. St. Quentin thinks it's a good
scheme, that's another matter. But only for himself. What is right for
him, in his crippled condition, is one thing; what is right for you,
is another. Let him run the shop alone, and you go on learning to be a
distinguished K.C., there's a dear. Don't be changeable, my boy."

"I'm not really changeable, mother," said Jack. "This is my first
departure. And it isn't as if I need slave my way up to success in
a profession I don't really care very much for. I've come to the
conclusion that I'd far rather be poor in a book shop than rich by
pumping up excitement and rage in the interests of clients you can't
bear the sight of and probably don't believe in. And I'm fond of books,
and, as you know, I adore old Pat and in a way I feel pledged to him
too after all our times together in the War; and with his one leg what
else could he do? I was with him when he lost it and I feel bound to
help."

"I can't agree," said Mrs. Harford, "that for a one-legged man
second-hand book selling is the only possible employment, but I'll go
so far as to say that I like you to feel like that about him. All the
same, I don't see why he should need a partner. An assistant, yes, but
why my son as a partner? And also, can there be enough profit in a
second-hand book shop to keep two young men?"

"We shan't roll, of course," said Jack, "but we oughtn't to starve,
and there's always the chance of picking up a first folio for a few
shillings and selling it at its real value. So you will put up a little
money, darling, won't you? You wouldn't like me to touch my capital, I
know."

"No," said his mother. "I should hate it. All I can say now is that if
Mr. Tredegar approves I'll see what I can do. And of course he must be
consulted as to the premises you take, the lease, and all that kind of
thing. You promise that?"

"Well, darling," said Jack, "I would promise it if I could. But I
can't, because, you see, we've burnt our boats. We took the place a
fortnight ago."

"How naughty of you!" said his mother. "Then nothing I can say now is
of any use?"

"Nothing," he replied tragically. "Too late! Too late!"

"Where is this loathsome shop to be?" Mrs. Harford asked.

"In Motcombe Street," said Jack.

"But that isn't a popular part at all," his mother objected. "Very few
strangers pass along there."

"Pat says we don't want them," said Jack. "We shall send out
catalogues, and gradually get to be known. Of course we don't mind if
someone comes in by chance and buys the first folio; but there'll be no
fourpenny box or anything like that at the door. It's a good address,
and the rent is low."

"And you've actually taken it?" his mother asked.

"Actually," he replied.

"You will break my heart yet," said Mrs. Harford.

"Never," said her son, lifting her into the air.

"Don't be so absurd; let me down!" the little lady cried.

"Not till you've withdrawn that abominable remark about breaking your
heart."

"Very well then--but only under pressure."

"And not till you've kissed me like a loving and thoroughly approving
mother."

"I can't do that."

"Well, kiss me anyway," said Jack, holding her still higher.

And she did. Mothers (bless them) can be very weak.




VI


It was on the following Sunday that I found myself in Aubrey Walk,
discussing Ben's future with her, with Melanie Ames, and with two
or three of the young men who were in the habit of dwelling within
Melanie's aura. In Guy's absence in Meerut she did not deny herself
certain detached male followers. More and more do English girls seem to
be acquiring similar treasure.

The two girls made a pretty contrast: Ben so quick and alert, and
Melanie so casual and apparently uninterested, although with an instant
comment for every situation. Already, I observed, her tardiness had
begun to draw out Ben's practicality. In appearance they were a
contrast too, for Ben was fresh-complexioned, with rich brown hair
which had maintained its steady natural shade ever since I had known
her, whereas Melanie was pale and had changed the colour of her tresses
three times at least and was now meditating a return from dark to fair.

Ben was not exactly clever or witty, but her brain was nimble enough
and clear enough, and her laugh of such seductive clarity and readiness
as to put men on their mettle. Women who make men talk better than
they are accustomed to are always popular, even when they are plain;
and Ben was by no means plain. Indeed, she had such pleasant looks as
to cause constant surprise that she was still single and unattached;
but only among those people who do not know how foolishly young men
can choose their partners for life. Ben was probably too sane, too
brightly normal. The feet of the young men of her acquaintance were
either turned away from marriage altogether, or were dancing attendance
upon creatures more capricious, more artificial, more suggestive even
of decadence. Melanie, for example with her pallor and her exotic
_coiffure_, was clearly more attractive to Tubby Toller and Eric Keene,
who were plying her with cigarettes and other necessaries of life when
I entered. Both these youths, who had been too young for the War, were
now engaged in such walks of life as products of public schools and
universities take to: Tubby having a clerkship in the Treasury, and
Eric having one eye on the Bar, wherever the other may have been.

"Tell them about your scheme, Ben," said Melanie, when we were all at
our ease.

"Well," said Ben, "there seems to be a vacancy for a kind of agent who
will do all kinds of things for those who are too lazy or too busy or
too helpless to do them for themselves and would pay to be relieved.
Finding a house or flat, for example. There are heaps of people who
would cheerfully give ten pounds to have these found for them. There
are people all over the country, and in Scotland and Ireland, who would
like their shopping done for them, particularly when the Sales come on.
There are heaps of English people abroad--on the Continent, in India,
in the Colonies--who want things done for them in London and have no
one to apply to and trust. There is a constant demand for servants
of every kind, not only housemaids and nurses, but chauffeurs and
secretaries and private tutors. People want to know where they can have
bridge lessons and golf lessons and billiard lessons. It's all very
vague in my mind at present, but I'm sure there's something practical
in it."

"It's not vague to me at all," said Tubby; "it's concrete. I've been
thinking like a black while you've been talking, and I believe I've got
a title. You must be original and alluring: a signboard, jolly colours,
nice assistants."

"I should call it 'Ben Trovato,'" said Eric.

"Oh, don't!" Ben groaned. "No more puns on my unfortunate name, please."

"Or 'Ben's Balm for Harassed Housewives,'" Eric continued.

"Or just a notice like this," said Melanie:


      DOMESTIC DIFFICULTIES
     FORWARD SOLUTIONS WITHIN


"Be serious," said Tubby. "I've got a real title for you. What do you
think of 'The Beck and Call'?"

"Very good," I said.

"I think you should have a signboard hanging out," said Tubby, "Like
an old inn, and on the sign, which would be very gay, something like
this:--


        THE BECK AND CALL
     DOMESTIC PROBLEM BUREAU

      BRING YOUR NEEDS TO US
         FEES MODERATE


"I don't know about 'moderate,'" said Melanie. "It's what the most
expensive hotels always say."

"Yes, and 'Domestic Problems'?" said Eric. "Don't they usually mean
rows between husband and wife? Admiralty, Probate and Divorce stuff?"

"I suppose so," said Tubby. "But it would be impossible to put up
anything that could not be misunderstood by someone. In connection
with 'Beck and Call' I think 'Domestic Problems' might stand. And,
after all, if a wife did come to complain of her husband there would
be no great harm done; she would simply be told that that kind of
business was not transacted and sent off to the nearest police court or
solicitor."

"But you could charge her for it just the same," said Eric. "After all,
knowing who is the nearest or best divorce solicitor is very special
knowledge and ought to be well paid for."

"Yes," said Tubby, "I've lived in the same house for two years, but
I'll be hanged if I know where the nearest police station is, or the
nearest fire station, or the nearest pawnbroker. Those are the valuable
facts of life, and I am ignorant of all of them. I know where my own
doctor lives, and my own dentist, but I haven't a notion where there is
a strange one handy. And of course dentists never work at night. The
address of a good dentist who would answer a night call would be worth
a tenner to anyone. You ought to specialize in that, Ben."

"I will," said Ben. "You are being very useful to me. Go on."

"The best of everything," said Eric, hastily cutting in, "is a good
thing to know. It takes a lot of finding out oneself. I've got a
haberdashery chap, for instance, who is absolutely useless with
socks. His vests are good, his shirts, his collars; but his socks are
disgraceful. Very dear, and no wear in them at all. 'Advice as to the
best shops for everything' would be a great line for you."

"I saw a shop the other day," Tubby said, "where there were Chinese
birds' nests in the window. For soup. I'll give you the address, Ben.
That will be something to start on."

"Yes," said Melanie, "and I know the best place for rings and bracelets
made of elephants' hair. For luck, you know. You'd better make a note
of that."

"And China tea," said I.

"And Waterford glass," said Melanie.

"And Japanese artichokes," said Tubby. "They're delicious and they're
practically weeds, but how many greengrocers have them? Hardly any."

"And salad oil," said Melanie. "The awful cart-grease most people give
you!"

"I'll tell you another thing worth knowing in your business," said
Eric. "Places--seaside resorts--where the water isn't hard. My old
father had a horror of hard water and all our summer holidays were
regulated by that. But it was the most difficult thing to find out."

"I hope you're writing all these things down," said Ben. "I must
have one of those big alphabetical books. I'd no idea how clever you
are--you're well worth a guinea a box."

"That reminds me," said Eric. "The best chemists. Where to get the best
soap."

"And the best lavender water," said I.

"And the best cold-cure," said Tubby. "Nothing so important as that."

"What price indigestion?" asked Melanie.

"Yes, of course," said Tubby. "I know of some ripping stuff."

"But you're going much too far," said Ben.

"Never mind," said Tubby, "you'll find it'll all help. You can't know
too much."

"There's that wonderful place for jam in Paris," said Melanie. "I
forgot the name. It's in the Rue de Sèze: oh yes, Tandrade. You see
them making it in the shop. Nothing like it. I'm sure that anyone who
could act as an intermediary between English people and the best French
shops would make a fortune."

"Or the other way round," said Tubby. "I'll bet you France is full of
people who would like to get things from London but don't know how.
Think of the awful things they have to put up with now," he went on.
"Have you ever been in a small French chemist's? No one but a peasant
in a smock to look after you. And their shoe leather; I mean for men.
And their umbrellas. I can see an International Shopping Bureau going
very strong."

"Please stop," said Ben, in mock despair. "You're too resourceful. And
what do you think," she asked, turning to me, "shall we call it 'The
Beck and Call'?"

"I think that's admirable," I said. "I wish I'd thought of it."




VII


When Colonel Staveley, with his buxom Belle, returned from Cap d'Ail
and found no daughter to receive him, he was bewildered and shocked.

Still, as everything was comfortable and the servants were welcoming
and kind, and even more because it is not so simple or desirable to
lose one's temper in the presence of second wives as first, the Colonel
controlled himself; but when Ben called, he relaxed.

"I can't conceive why you aren't satisfied to go on here," he began.
"Your mo--I mean Belle--would be delighted to have you. She likes you,
I know. She's said so, often. She said so again only last night. And
you like her, don't you?"

"Yes," said Ben. "I do. But I don't think this is the place for me any
longer. So long as you were alone I was glad to do what I could; but
you've got Belle now. It's her house. It wouldn't be right--apart from
anything else--for me to live here now. I can't think why you don't see
that."

"She doesn't understand the servants as you did," said the Colonel.
"She--she doesn't understand me. Those sandwiches you used to cut me at
eleven--no one gets me those any more. I mean, not as they ought to be:
thin and soft and without crust."

"I'm sorry," said Ben.

"Sorry!" exclaimed the Colonel. "Sorry is as sorry does. If you really
were sorry you'd come back. Where are you pigging it, may I ask?"

"I'm sharing Melanie Ames's flat in Aubrey Walk," said Ben. "It comes
far cheaper and there's plenty of room. And as soon as I can"--here she
produced the bombshell--"I'm going to open a business."

For an old warrior the Colonel took the blow badly. He had no words at
all at first. "Business!" he then gasped; "what business?"

To his growing exasperation Ben told him our plans.

"Oh! he's in it," said her father, referring to my own modest financial
share, and adding, if I know anything about him, "I never cared for the
man, as you are probably aware."

He stamped up and down the room for a while and then began again.

"I'm not narrow-minded, thank God!" he declared. "Whatever else I may
be, I'm not narrow-minded; but I'm bound to say I don't think it's
quite fair to me to open an office of this sort. If you were taking
up the secretaryship of a ladies' golf club I shouldn't mind. I'm all
for women playing golf, so long as they have links of their own. Or a
secretaryship to an M.P., say, as long as it wasn't a damned Labour
member. But an office with a brass plate and your name--my name--on it,
no! I draw the line there."

"It won't have our name," said Ben. "It's to be called 'The Beck and
Call.'"

"Oh, is it?" he cried. "Is it? I like that! Colonel Staveley's daughter
advertising herself at anyone's beck and call. A nice pill for an old
soldier to swallow, a nice thing to explain away to one's friends."

Ben was silent for a while. Then, "I think you're taking it too
seriously," she said. "Many changes have come about since you were
young. The world has given up a lot of its sillinesses, and one of them
is the prejudice against people going into business. I am convinced
that no girl of twenty-two ought to be just a drone."

"I can't think why you never married," said the Colonel, peevishly.

"I suppose because it takes two to make a marriage," said Ben.

"You must have played your cards devilish badly," her father retorted.
"There's Alicia, she's married, even though her husband is dead. And
Merrill's married. And most of your cousins are married. I can't
understand what you've been doing."

"Some girls must be single," said Ben. "Why, there are millions more
women than men in this country alone. I read the figures only the other
day."

"It is the duty of every woman of spirit," said the Colonel,
oracularly, "not to be one of them. And what," he continued, "will you
do when all the money's gone?"

"I don't see why it shouldn't succeed," said Ben.

"Succeed!" the Colonel snorted.

"Well, some things succeed," said Ben. "Everything doesn't fail. Look
at the people round you: they're not all bankrupt."

"Very nearly," said the Colonel.

"They seem to have money for a good many frivolities and luxuries
still," said Ben. "Anyway, I mean to do my best to make it succeed. And
I hope," she added, "that if you're in any difficulty here you'll come
to 'The Beck and Call.' I must send Belle some cards when we're ready."

"You needn't trouble," said the Colonel. "If you ever see Belle or
myself on your premises or catch us recognizing this nonsense of yours,
I'll"--well, you know how that kind of man always finishes that kind
of sentence--"I'll eat my hat."

"Don't do that, father," said Ben. "Promise me a new one instead."

"With the greatest pleasure in the world," said the Colonel.




VIII


The Colonel was not alone in his hostility to Ben's decision. Most of
the family, indeed, expressed disapproval, which is a word that was, I
suspect, originally coined for no other purpose than to describe the
attitude of people to any novel or independent action on the part of
any of their relations, the younger ones in particular.

Ben's eldest sister, Alicia, who had settled with her two children,
Paul and Timothy, at Hove, after her husband, Bertrand, was killed in
the war, came hurrying up to add her voice to the attacking chorus; but
she was not as wholehearted as her father, because, never in favour of
his second marriage, she was glad that Ben had left Hyde Park Gardens.
That now, she agreed, was Belle's domain, and beyond keeping an eye on
certain pieces of furniture and a picture or so which she had marked
down as some day to be her children's, she intended to have no more
interest in it. But it was not in the least her idea that Ben should
live with Melanie Ames and start out on a career of her own. Alicia's
idea was that Ben should join her at Hove and help with the boys; and
she put her case strongly.

"Of course it's what you ought to do," she said. "They would be good
for you and you would be good for them. They ought to see somebody else
besides me, now that their poor father has passed over, and the more
you have to do with children now, the better you will understand them
when you have some of your own. For I suppose you intend to marry," she
added sharply. "You haven't got all this absurd modern girl's dislike
of men as anything but tennis and dancing partners?"

Ben said that at the moment she was thinking not of men but of her
livelihood.

"Nonsense," said Alicia. "You know perfectly well you are doing it
purely from selfishness. You are excited about going into business just
as other girls would be excited about their coming out. It's sheer
self-indulgence. And you don't need the money," she went on; "you have
grandmamma's two hundred, or whatever it is, and if you lived sensibly
with me and put it into the common stock you would have no anxieties
whatever. I am sure Bertrand would have wished it. In fact, I happen to
know that he does wish it. I asked him last night."

Ben opened her eyes. "What can you mean?" she asked, "by saying that
you know he wishes it, and that you asked him last night--when he's
dead?"

"I don't think of Bertrand as dead," said Alicia. "There is no death.
He has merely passed over. I am in constant communication with him. I
am very psychic; strangely so, considering what a matter-of-fact family
we are. A throwback, I suppose." She closed her eyes. "Would you go
against Bertrand's express desire?" she asked earnestly.

"I don't know," said Ben, "but in any case I should rather have it
expressed to me direct."

"And so you shall if you will come to Hove," Alicia replied eagerly.
"There is a Circle there which you shall join. Not that I have to call
in any medium myself; I am too psychic. And Bertrand and I are one, as
we always have been. But it would be necessary for you."

"No," said Ben. "I should be afraid. I don't like that kind of thing.
And it's too late anyhow."

"I think you're horridly selfish," said Alicia. "And speaking as your
elder sister, almost old enough to be your mother, I want you to
know that I don't think you ought to be running a business at all.
It's not nice. The kind of women who run businesses are not nice;
they're hard and they've usually had a past. You will acquit me of
narrow-mindedness, I am sure, but that's how I feel. And I don't
believe it's too late to get out of the agreement, if you've signed
one. Considering the way most house-agents behave, I think it's one's
duty to get out of agreements now and then, just as a lesson to them."

"My dear Alicia!" Ben exclaimed.

"Well, I do," Alicia replied petulantly. "And as for poor Bertrand,
he'll be heartbroken. He had built all his hopes on your joining us at
Hove."

"Is he in Hove too?" Ben asked.

"Practically," said Alicia.

"No," said Ben; "I can't come; it's impossible."

"And then there's your health," said Alicia. "You'll lose your
complexion poring over registers and accounts in London. You'll begin
to look raddled; like all women in business. People will call you
'capable,' and that's the end. No one wants a capable woman, out of her
office."

Ben only laughed.

"And Hove's so invigorating," Alicia resumed. "The Sea Wall! And
haven't you any interest in your nephews? You were fond of Bertrand,
weren't you? You always seemed to be. Are you going to neglect his
boys? Ben, dear, I thought better of you."

Alicia sighed and looked like one against whom the whole world was
arrayed.

"You're making me feel very guilty," Ben said. "But it's no good.
I can't change now. And I believe--if this is selfishness--that a
certain amount of selfishness is right. I am sure that one ought to
try to be independent; everyone ought. And why shouldn't it be called
'self-help' or 'self-reliance' which are considered virtues, instead
of 'selfishness'? Anyway, I must go on with it now. If it fails, I may
change my views altogether, or, of course, if anything happened to you,
and Paul and Timothy were left stranded, I might think it was my duty
to come to the rescue. But not now."

Alicia made a noise as of one who would live for ever.

"Besides," Ben went on, "it would only mean for a short time probably.
You're not so settled as all that. Supposing you were to marry again."

"Ben!" exclaimed Alicia, "I'm shocked at you."

"I'm sorry if I hurt you," said Ben. "But people do marry again.
Look--well, look at father."

"I decline to look at father," said Alicia. "I think it's horrid. At
his age too."

"Well, then," said Ben, "look at Belle. She's not so very much older
than you."

"I think that's almost more horrid," said Alicia. "And it's very cruel
of you, I think, to say such a thing to me, knowing as you do how
devoted Bertrand and I always were and still are. And the boys, too!
What man wants to marry a widow with two boys?"

"I feel convinced that it has been done," said Ben. "But I apologize.
And I am very sorry, but I must repeat that I am going to be
independent; I want to stand absolutely alone. I think it's my duty."

"I'm tired of the way people use the word 'duty' when they want to
please themselves," said Alicia.

"My dear Alicia," said Ben, "don't let's start all over again. You said
that before. If you knew what efforts I make not to say things twice in
one conversation!"

Alicia compressed her lips with grim firmness. "Very well," she said.
"There's no more to be done. But it will be terrible telling Bertrand."

"Surely," Ben suggested, "he knows already?"

"Ah, that I cannot say," said Alicia. "All I know is, he counts on me
for everything."




IX


Ben's second sister, Merrill, whose husband was a country vicar, also
had something to say against Ben's project, and said it; but with less
acrimony than Alicia. Merrill had always been easygoing.

"Of course it was quite right to leave father," she agreed. "You
couldn't have gone on there, with that fat woman. And what we're going
to call her I have no notion. Nothing shall ever make me say 'Mother.'
What do you call her?"

"I call her Belle," said Ben. "We arranged it."

"I couldn't do that," said Merrill. "I don't believe in the word as a
name anyway. I think of it as something entirely different; something,
between you and me, of which I'm sick to death, as you would be if you
lived in a vicarage a few inches from a church. Ugh!--bells! But the
name's a problem. 'Mother' is impossible; 'Stepmother' is absurd; 'Mrs.
Staveley' would be absurd too. The wisest thing is not to see her at
all and then one needn't call her anything. But that," she continued,
"is nothing. What I want to ask you to do is to come and live with us;
and if you had a spark of decency you'd do it."

Ben made a movement of dissent.

"And it wouldn't be such a sacrifice either," her sister went on, "for
there's lots of things to do. Egbert won't have a car, it's true, but
we can get one in the Village, only a bob a mile. There's a golf links
four miles off and there's plenty of tennis and bridge. There are some
quite decent young men; one, by the way, who's rolling."

"But there are the bells!" said Ben.

"Never mind about them," Merrill urged. "One can get used to
anything--except," she added, "Egbert. Be a sport and think of your
sister. I assure you, my dear, I shall go mad if I don't have someone
to talk to and be with. You wouldn't have me in an asylum, would you?"

"But my dear Merrill," said Ben, "how can it be as bad as that? What is
the matter with Egbert? You used to like him. I can't understand why
everyone seems to get so tired of their husbands or wives. It makes me
glad I'm not married. You liked him once, tremendously."

"I don't say I hate him now," said Merrill, "but he's become
impossible. He spends his whole life between neglecting the parish
and writing his book. It's not living at all. And no one will read his
book. Who wants books on the Hittites? I tell him he'd far better be
paying some attention to the English in the village, but that makes him
cross. And when he's not writing, he's complaining of being overlooked
and not being made a canon. He's always perfectly sweet and polite to
me, and I could slap him. Not that we quarrel: not a bit of it. Ours
isn't the kind of house you could call a 'Bickerage' for a moment. But
we just stagnate. He doesn't really need me and I'm bored by him. Oh,
how bored! If only he would take one or two backward boys it would be a
relief, a change, but he won't. He says they would interfere with his
work.

"This isn't," she went on, "the kind of life that I married for. But
then, what is it that one marries for? I know what the Church service
says, of course, only too well. But surely there should be some fun
too? That is what we're brought up to believe and expect; but I assure
you, Ben, I've never been anything in Egbert's life whatever. Not
really. I'm merely in his house; I see that his meals are punctual and
fit to eat; I see that he has clean surplices; I see that his study is
dusted and the fire lit; and I listen to his tales of woe. And that's
the end of it. I'm just his wife. He wanted me badly enough, and he
got me, and that was the end. It has never occurred to him that a wife
could want to be anything more than the punctual inmate of a man's
house. I can't even keep a dog, because dogs get on his nerves. But he
likes you--you could make him a little more human, I believe, if anyone
could. Do give up this 'Beck and Call' stuff and come and help me. I'm
certain it's your duty."

Ben shook her head.

"But don't you do anything in the parish?" she asked. "Don't you visit?"

"Do I not visit?" exclaimed Merrill. "Of course I do. I have to. It all
falls on me. But is that what I was made for? Why, I'm only thirty-one.
Is that any life for a woman of thirty-one? No, Ben dear, be a sport
and come and stay with us and you and I will have some fun and you'll
keep me from thinking too much and regretting too much. Egbert won't
worry you a bit; he'll hardly know you're there."

"My poor Merrill," said Ben, "I wish I could. But it's too late. I've
got into this business and I must stick to it."

"Very well, then," said Merrill, "let me be your first client and get
me a nice jolly curate, even if I have to pay for him myself."




X


Uncle Paul, however, approved, and Uncle Paul was a valuable ally.
Uncle Paul was Mrs. Staveley's and Lady Collum's brother: a man of
about sixty who had lived with his parents as long as they lived and
then had taken rooms in Bayswater with a housekeeper. Naturally shy
and unambitious, and made more shy by an unconquerable stammer, he had
never gone into any business but remained home-keeping and retired,
famous in the family for his mechanical skill. If a doll's house were
required, Uncle Paul made it. His jig-saw puzzles had been marvels
of difficulty before the term jig-saw was invented. With his lathe
and other tools he added little improvements to most of the pieces of
mechanism that shops carelessly put forth.

But his masterpieces were ships, possibly because his father had been
a shipowner and much of Paul's odd time as a boy and youth had been
spent in prowling about the vessels in harbour. The sea itself had no
attraction for him; he was the worst of sailors; but by everything to
do with ships he was fascinated.

From making models for young friends and testing them, he had come to
sailing them himself, and was one of the most assiduous frequenters of
the Round Pond, with the long wand of office proper to all Round Pond
habitués who have Masters' Certificates.

That was his principal outdoor recreation. The only other motive that
could take him from his abode was his love of music, instrumental
rather than vocal, and the Queen's Hall knew few figures more
intimately than this tall spare man, with a slight stoop, a pointed
grey beard and highly magnifying gold-rimmed spectacles.

It has never been satisfactorily determined whether the saying about
the darlings of the gods dying young means young in years or young in
heart. But if it ought to run "Those whom the gods love are still young
no matter when they die," then Uncle Paul was one of the elect.

"I think," he said, after listening to the outline of "The Beck and
Call" project--and you must understand that whenever Uncle Paul spoke,
it was with great difficulty, the words sometimes keeping distressingly
out of reach for agonizing moments (during which, like so many
sufferers from this impediment, he refused all assistance) or rushing
out pellmell--"I think," he said, "it's a good scheme. Very amusing at
any rate. You will meet such lots of odd people. And you will be doing
something. I don't mean," he added hastily, "that you have not been
busy up to now. We have all admired the way you kept house and devoted
yourself to your father. But that was routine. Now you will be in the
world and having adventures." He sighed. "What fun!" he said.

Ben amplified, and in the course of the story of the genesis of her
plan mentioned Mrs. Lintot's remark that she would willingly pay an
annual subscription for these vicarious London services.

"Yes," said Uncle Paul, "that's of the highest importance, a guarantee.
Now what you have got to do is to write to all your friends explaining
your scheme and offering to be at their service for a year at, say,
three guineas each, and asking them to write to all their friends about
it too, like one of these snowballs one reads of, or the American
officer's prayer. Anybody living far out of London ought to find it
well worth three guineas, and three guineas is nothing. Lots of them
may drop off after the first year, but it would give you a start. If
you get only sixty or seventy annual clients to begin with, that would
ensure your rent. Some of these people would probably get their money's
worth over and over again, even if others didn't. At the end of the
year, you might have to raise the subscription, but in the first year
you will be making your name and you can afford to be generous. I shall
put down three guineas myself, but what for, I haven't the vaguest
notion at the moment; and if I get no return I shan't grumble--for the
unusual reason that it will be my own fault."

"I should hate to take three guineas from you," said Ben. "You couldn't
possibly make so much use of me as that, and I'd rather do it for
nothing."

"Hush!" said Uncle Paul. "Don't say such things. The dangerous words
'for nothing' must disappear from your vocabulary the moment you go
into business."

"How horrid!" said Ben. "But I defy you to think of anything you could
want from me. When you've got Mrs. Crosbie eating her head off, how
could you need 'The Beck and Call'?"

"We'll see," said Uncle Paul. "Here's my cheque anyway. I want to be
your first client."




XI


In the choice of business premises Ben showed not a little sagacity. I
know, for I was with her.

She began by consulting a firm of house-agents, which, like so many
of those necessary but unsatisfactory organizations, appeared to
consist of twins--Messrs. Charger & Charger. What the evolution of a
house-agent is, no one has ever discovered, but an addiction neither
to industry nor to strict veracity seems to be an essential to their
perfected state. All house-agents have youth and eloquence and make an
attempt at social ease. The effrontery that accompanies the sale of
motor-cars is never quite theirs: they do not actually puff tobacco
smoke at their customers while leaning against the wall with their
hands in their pockets, but they probably would like to.

Whether we saw either of the principals--either Charger or Charger--we
never knew; but the place was full of glib young men who employed the
first-person-singular in their conversations, each of whom in turn
might have been Charger or Charger, but all of whom probably were not.

It was by disregarding their suggestions that Ben gradually arrived at
a decision.

"I am thinking," she said, "of opening an office where advice can be
sought on all kinds of domestic problems, and I want it to be in a
wealthy residential district but not in a main street."

"Not in Piccadilly?" the young man asked.

"No, _not_ in a main street," said Ben.

"I have a very desirable upper part in Lower Regent Street," he said.

"_Not_ in a main street," Ben replied.

The young man turned over the pages of a register.

"How would you like Long Acre?" he inquired.

"Would you call that a wealthy residential district?" Ben replied.

"What about the Strand?" he asked.

"_Not_ in a main street," said Ben. "Besides, surely it must be in a
part where women shop? The Strand is mostly full of men and tourists,
isn't it? I know I personally have never been there except to a
restaurant or a theatre."

"That's true," said the young man. "A shopping quarter. I understand.
Somewhere off Oxford Street, you mean."

"Well, what have you got there?" Ben asked.

"I'm afraid I haven't anything," he said. "Or South Audley Street?"

"Yes," said Ben, "that's much better."

He looked through his register again.

"No," he said, "there's nothing there. But"--brightly--"what about the
upper part of a garage near the Imperial Institute? I can recommend
that most highly."

It was then that we came out.

Taking our fate into our own hands, we spent the afternoon in walking
in likely places, and at last came upon an old book shop in Motcombe
Street, which is near Knightsbridge and between the distinguished and
far from poverty-stricken squares of Eaton and of Lowndes. At the side
of the shop was a signboard in white and light green on which were the
agreeable words:--


         THE
     BOOKLOVERS'
        REST


In the window were rows on rows of volumes, old and less old, some
opened at the title page and others at delectable coloured plates.

The shop was evidently new, judging by the paint; and from a window
above it a notice emerged stating that the upper part was to let and
was suitable for offices.

As we approached, a small and intensely waggish black spaniel dashed
out of the door with all the excitement that such dogs manifest when
their masters are coming too, and a moment later a fresh-looking young
man in a tweed suit, without a hat, sauntered from the shop, crossed
the road and surveyed the premises with a pleased proprietary eye.
After a brief space he called "Patrick!" and there came to the doorway
another young man, who had a more studious air and, we noticed, limped.
The first young man said nothing but slightly extending both hands,
elevated his thumbs to a vertical position.

"Good," said the lame one, and then all three retired to the recesses
of the shop.

Meanwhile Ben's mind was working very quickly. Motcombe Street, she
remarked, was only a few yards from the two great Knightsbridge
drapers, and Sloane Street with all its millinery and boots and
dressmakers was close by. If two young men thought it a good enough
spot to establish themselves as second-hand book sellers, might it not
be equally or even more suitable for our purposes? And especially so if
she could induce a Knightsbridge or Sloane Street tradesman, or both,
to allow her to put up a finger-board. At any rate, the rooms must be
looked at.

In the course of the conversation that followed, Ben said that the
only real drawback was that there was no private door. The upper part
could be reached only through the shop. But neither Mr. Harford, the
young man with the dog (whose name appeared to be "Soul"), nor Mr.
St. Quentin, the young man with the limp, thought this a very serious
objection.

"If _you_ don't mind," said Mr. Harford, "we shan't. You will probably
have more customers than we, and we shall try and bag some of them."

"Yes," quoted Mr. St. Quentin, or Patrick, "'and those that came to
scoff remained to pray.' In other words, if they can't get a governess
or a chauffeur from you, they may stop on the way down to buy a cookery
book from us."

"That's too one-sided," said Ben. "Equally why shouldn't people who
can't find anything they want on your shelves, be sent upstairs to see
what I can do for them?"

"Of course," said Mr. Harford. "Only yesterday, for example, we had an
old boy from America. Americans, it seems, want either first editions
of Conrad and Masefield, or something to do with Dr. Johnson. This was
a Johnsonian, but he was also in need of a service flat. Now if you
had been here I should have pushed him up and you would have fleeced
him."

"Yes," said Mr. St. Quentin, "and then there was that rummy old bird
this morning. She wanted a novel. Anything to pass the time, she said.
But when she came to look round, there was nothing that she hadn't read
or that she wanted to read. Dickens was too vulgar and Thackeray was
too cynical. Meredith was too difficult and Hardy too sad. Trollope
was too trivial and George Eliot too bracing. Wells was too clever and
Bennett too detailed. Galsworthy was too long and Kipling too short.
And so on. She ended by offering me a fiver for Jack's spaniel, which
she called a 'doggy.' After I had repulsed the offer she asked me if
I could tell her the best play that had a matinée to-day. The world's
full of these drifters. Now if you had been here, I should have steered
her to you."

"To waste my time?" Ben asked.

"Not a bit of it. She was rolling in money; all she needed was a
directing mind, such as I am sure yours is. What she wanted was to get
through the day, and you would have helped her, and business would
result. As a matter of fact, she did buy something; she bought 'Tom
Brown's School Days,' for the curious reason, into which I was far too
wily to enquire further, that her dear father was at Winchester."

"One little point, Miss Staveley," said Mr. Harford. "You are setting
up an advice bureau. Won't you give us your opinion on our signboard:
do you think it reads all right?"

"It seems to me most alluring," said Ben; "unless possibly the word
'Rest' might lead people to stay too long."

"Well," said Mr. St. Quentin, "as a matter of fact we had a tussle over
that and Jack won. I was for just 'Bookbuyers' Corner.'"

"Very pretty," said Ben.

"Yes," said Mr. Harford, "but as I very properly and acutely pointed
out, this isn't a corner."

"Still--" Ben began.

"No," said Jack, "a corner's a corner."

"Very well," said his partner, "I give in; but what do you think he
wanted on the sign as we now more or less have it? You won't credit it,
Miss Staveley. Catch hold of something while I tell you."

"Ah, shut up," said Jack.

"He wanted 'Ye' instead of 'The.'"

"No!" said Ben, in horror.

"He did," said Patrick: "he actually and infernally did. Like a tea
shop. He's not altogether a bad-looking man; he would have taken quite
a decent degree but for the War; he has played cricket for his county;
he induced me to become his partner; and yet he wanted 'Ye' instead of
'The.'"

"Can this be true?" Ben asked.

"Well, I stick to it," said Jack. "We are out to make a living and I
know what people are. You might lose a few highbrows by saying 'Ye' but
you'd get a bigger following generally. Still, Patrick here wouldn't
give way. Well," he made an exaggerated gesture of fatalism, "we know
what the reason will be if we're bankrupt, don't we, old Soul?" and he
patted the waggish spaniel.

"And," said the lame one, "I haven't told you the worst. He came down
one day with a design lettered by one of his architect friends,


     'YE OLD BOOKE SHOPPE'


in which 'shop' had two _P_'s and an _E_. I haven't fully recovered
yet----"

"It would have meant great business," said Jack, defiantly. "There's a
fascination about that double P and that final E that lots of people
find irresistible. No matter, the die is cast. By the way," he added to
Ben, "I suppose you're calling yourself something?"

"I was thinking of 'The Beck and Call,'" said Ben. "I wanted a
signboard rather like yours."

"Make it 'Ye,'" said Mr. Harford, "and you'll be a millionaire."

"No," said Ben. "I couldn't face my friends. It's bad enough as it is."

"And you'll take our upper part?" Mr. St. Quentin asked.

"I can't say at the moment," said Ben. "I must consider. But if I don't
it will probably only be because I don't think either of you is serious
enough to be my landlord."

But after the lawyers had done their worst with it, Ben signed an
agreement.




XII


In assembling her staff Ben experienced a certain amount of luck in
stumbling upon Miss Peterson.

Miss Peterson was one of those plain, capable but not originative women
whose destiny it is to work loyally for others. And Ben was just the
kind of other for whom they work with the most zeal and fidelity. From
Miss Peterson's position as keeper of the outer office and the door,
she came to be known as Jan, which was short for janitress, and but for
her "The Beck and Call" would probably not have lasted a month. With
her untiring devotion to buttress it, it turned the corner.

Jan arrived early and left late, and, what is more, refused to go out
for lunch, but ate it furtively at her desk. Whether men eat too much
lunch or women too little is a question that has never been settled;
and as they are totally different creatures there is probably no need
for any comparisons. Suffice it to say that Jan could not be induced to
improve her scanty and hasty repast, and seemed to be fairly healthy
on it. A certain element of self-sacrifice or even mortification was
necessary to her happiness; she was a mixture of watchdog and nun.
If ever she permitted herself a luxury or accepted an invitation to
a party of pleasure, she did it as though performing a penance. Such
was her own humility and her innate conviction that this is a vale of
tears, and ought to be, that every happiness or delight was a cause of
suspicion and surprise. Praise-God-Barebones and his companions planted
the English soil deeper than they knew.

The only other member of the staff, at first, was a precocious London
boy, certainly no Puritan, who was known by his own wish as Dolly. His
real name was Arthur, which his friends, all as Cockney as himself,
soon converted to Arfur, not only because that was their general
tendency but because his surname Crowne set up an additional allurement
to do so. Arfur Crowne in course of time was reduced, on the lines
often followed in the evolution of nicknames, to 'arf a dollar, and
from this it had been an easy gradation to Dolly.

Dolly's age was sixteen, and he was small for it. He was also old for
it, in so far as dress and knowledge of the world, or at any rate of
London, were concerned. He always wore a bowler hat and carried a
cane, and in his possession, on view but never known to be worn, was
a pair of smart tan gloves. In addition to an exhaustive acquaintance
with London's houses of variety, even in the outlying districts,
football heroes, cricket heroes, cinema stars and probably winners on
the flat, Dolly could give you in a moment the number of the bus you
needed for any route.

Where he got the money to visit so many places of entertainment, no one
at first knew; for his wages could not well be large and there was no
reason to suspect him of dishonesty. But he was so regularly in funds
as to lead to the suspicion that he had private means and was working
at "The Beck and Call" for a wager. So Tubby Toller maintained. And,
as he said, it would be very dull to find out where the money came
from, for one of the compensations in this dreary life of ours is the
opportunity we get for wondering how other people can afford it.

But later the secret came out, for Mr. Harford gave it away. Mr.
Harford's range of interests on the pleasant planet on which he found
himself was, I ought to say, sufficiently wide to include the too often
pathetic efforts to come in first on the part of those untrustworthy
but beautiful animals with noble heads, glossy coats, and four slender
legs on which most English men, and many English women, "have
something" every day. It was Dolly's special privilege to meet in his
lunch hour mysterious acquaintances with special information about
the "three-thirty," and this information Mr. Harford was delighted to
receive. Now and then, of course, the horse "went down," but in the
main the two confederates did very well.

Dolly's post was by the telephone in the outer office, which, on
occasions, could be connected with another instrument on Ben's desk;
but his dominating desire and ambition was, by his own knowledge
and discretion, to render any such connexion unnecessary. So far
from sharing Jan's willingness to lunch in, Dolly was off, with his
gloves and cane, immediately the clock struck one--to the Ritz or
Savoy, according to Jack Harford. He was never late in returning, but
sometimes stood on the step finishing a cigarette until the hands
pointed to two.

Mr. Harford and Dolly may have been almost on an equality, but it
was one of the jokes at "The Booklovers' Rest" that Dolly was too
aristocratic to have any friendly relations with the boy--Ernie
Bones--who opened and shut that abode of culture, and carried to the
post such parcels as were dispatched, and once a month stuck stamps
on myriad catalogues. But there are grades, right through the social
scale, and Dolly stood on a plane far above Ernie's.

Ernie had never worn or carried gloves in his life. They would have
looked as strange on him as a monocle in the eye of a London roadmender.




XIII


Aunt Agatha had of course to be told. Aunt Agatha was the widow of Sir
Davenport Collum and Ben's mother's sister. Her opinion on any subjects
whatever doesn't really matter, but Ben would not have been happy to
have left her in ignorance.

"You mustn't think me narrow-minded," Aunt Agatha said, "because I'm
not. Whatever else I may be, I'm not narrow-minded. But I really
do think you might have chosen something better to do than to be a
maid-of-all-work or a Jack-of-all-trades at the command of anyone with
the money to pay your fee. You--you demean yourself. We should have
dignity."

"Yes, aunt," said Ben, "but one must maintain oneself first. There is
no dignity without independence."

"But surely--don't you remember Landseer's picture?" inquired Lady
Collum.

"No, aunt. That was 'Dignity and Impudence,'" Ben replied.

"Yes, so it was. I had forgotten. And, after all, the words are very
much alike. I can see it now. We had an engraving in the hall at home.
Two dogs. Well, dear, as you were saying?"

"I was saying, aunt," Ben resumed, "that dignity without independence
is only a shadow. What I want is to make my own living and 'The Beck
and Call' seems to be a way. At any rate, it is worth trying."

"A horrid phrase," said Lady Collum. "'Beck and Call.' Why, it suggests
dependence and nothing else. Servility even. You belong to every one
but yourself; you will be London's errand girl."

"But if I don't mind that, what then?" Ben asked. "And besides, I shall
reserve the right to select my jobs."

"Beggars," said Aunt Agatha, "cannot be choosers. There's a proverb to
that effect and I am a great believer in proverbs. An apple a day--ah!
how true!"

"Yes, aunt, but how miserable you would be if anything kept your own
darling doctor away! And I believe it's really an onion, as a matter of
fact."

"Onions undoubtedly are very healthy," said Lady Collum. "But what were
we saying? Oh, yes. This office of yours. 'The To and Fro.' Where is it
to be?"

"'The Beck and Call,' aunt," Ben corrected. "I have taken two rooms
over an old book-shop in Motcombe Street."

"Taken them!" exclaimed Lady Collum, in horror. "I had no idea it had
gone so far as that. What is the use of my giving you any advice if the
deed is done? It's like locking the garage door after the car has been
stolen."

"But I don't think I was asking you to advise me," said Ben. "I was
merely telling you about it, because I thought you would like to know,
and in case you knew of anyone who might want to make use of me."

"Oh dear! Oh dear!" exclaimed Lady Collum. "To think that it's all
settled! You're plighted to it now."

"Yes, aunt," said Ben. "The die is cast. There is no looking back. We
begin next Monday."

"Plighted!" murmured Lady Collum, dreamily. "What a beautiful word it
might be! Can be. Why, my dear, don't you marry some nice man instead
of opening offices?"

"Well, aunt, for one reason, no one that I cared for sufficiently has
asked me," said Ben smiling.

"Then you have had a proposal or two?" said Lady Collum, eagerly. "I'm
glad."

"Not very serious ones," Ben told her. "Only from Tommy Clinton."

"Oh, him!" said Aunt Agatha. "And yet you're very pretty," she went on.
"What's the matter with the other young men? Let's see, how old are
you?"

"Twenty-two," said Ben.

"That's a little late for the young ones," said Lady Collum, "or much
too early. Hasn't any nice older man asked you?"

"No, aunt," said Ben, "and I don't know that I want one either.
Marriage isn't everything. I can imagine an amusing business being far
more entertaining than a husband. But surely you see," she went on more
seriously, "that now that father's married again I must be independent.
I can't possibly go on living at home."

"Ah, yes," said Lady Collum. "Of course. Poor child, yes. The cruel and
ugly stepmother, my heart bleeds for you."

"But dear Aunt Agatha, she isn't cruel, and she isn't ugly," said Ben.
"And I like her."

"That's your sweet nature," Lady Collum replied, "or her artfulness.
And what about poor little Toby?" she resumed. "His home closed to him.
I can't think what your father was about. Surely at sixty-three he
might have continued to face life alone and then everything would be
happy still, and poor little Toby not at the mercy of this heartless
woman and you not driven out into the world to start 'The Hide and
Seek.'"

"'Beck and Call,' aunt," Ben corrected. "And I haven't been driven out;
I was glad to go."

"So you say," said Lady Collum. "But it's your kind heart. Anyway, it's
that motherless child I'm thinking most about--poor Toby."

"But, aunt, dear," said Ben, "Toby is hardly ever at home. He's at
Oxford until the vacation, and then he stays with friends. And he's six
feet tall. It's far too long since you saw him. I assure you he's in no
need of such sympathy."

"Poor child, poor child!" Lady Collum murmured. "It is dreadful when
the cuckoo displaces the young meadow-pipits. I saw it on a film.
Dreadful! My poor little Toby!"

"Well," said Ben, rising to go, and abandoning the struggle with
preconceived ideas (always a stubborn one), "you'll send to me if you
want any shopping done while you're down in the country, won't you?"

"Of course I will," said Aunt Agatha. "I'll do all I can for you. Let's
see, what is the place called?--'Mind the Step'?"

"'Beck and Call,' aunt," said Ben.

"Of course. How funny I should have said 'Mind the Step.' And yet how
natural!" she added, sighing deeply, "for I am always thinking about
her. The step! What a tragedy for all of you! How could your father
have done it! Well, you _will_ mind her, won't you? They're all hard
and all cunning. I know. I've read about them. And deceitful. And they
are always saving and stealing, and stealing and saving, for their own
children."

"But, dear aunt, you are so wrong about this," said Ben. "Belle is the
kindest thing. And she hasn't got any children of her own."

"So she says," was Lady Collum's last dark utterance.




XIV


Whether or no Ben's landlords made a special point of being on the
premises at the hour of her arrival I can't say, but certain it is
that they were always there to wish her good morning, and an element
of rivalry as to which would wish it first was not absent. It is also
certain that they esteemed highly the privilege of having such an
agreeable tenant.

Every one has a favorite snatch of song, which can be sung
unconsciously and bears no relation whatever to the mental status of
the singer. This was Jack's, droned to an Irish melody:--


     Good morning, O'Reilly,
       You are looking well.
     Are you the O'Reilly
       Who keeps this hotel?
     Are you the O'Reilly
       They speak of so highly?
     Good morning, O'Reilly,
       You _are_ looking well.


At quiet intervals all day this ditty reached Ben's ears from the
ground floor, until it became the _motif_ of her employment, and she
caught herself at all kinds of odd moments murmuring it too. In fact,
"Good morning, O'Reilly, you _are_ looking well," was the password
between Mr. Harford and herself. Mr. St. Quentin was less frivolous:
his humour was of the sardonic variety; but he too had snatches of
song, which also passed into Ben's repertory, chief of which was that
sweet but mournful Scottish lullaby:--


     My Bonnie lies over the ocean,
       My Bonnie lies over the sea,
     My Bonnie lies over the ocean,
       Oh, bring back my Bonnie to me.


As book sellers the two friends seemed to Ben to lack method and even
knowledge, but she hesitated to judge them because she knew so little
herself, and she could not but be conscious that her own business was
an unprofessional affair. In fact, they were all amateurs.

Her suspicions as to her neighbours were first aroused by a visit from
Mr. Harford one morning. He was carrying a volume, and his normally
careless countenance registered perplexity if not despair.

"Please help me, Miss Staveley," he said. "Patrick's out and I've no
notion what this book is worth. It isn't marked. There's a blighter
after it downstairs, and he looks as if he might be a dealer himself,
in which case it's probably valuable."

"It's no use asking me," said Ben. "You might as well ask your dog."

"But you're so clever," said Mr. Harford. "Tell me how it strikes you
as a stranger. Hold it in your hand."

"No," said Ben. "I shan't even guess. Why don't you tell him it was on
the shelves by mistake and isn't for sale?"

Mr. Harford looked at her with admiration.

"By Jingo!" he said, "that's brilliant!


     You _are_ the O'Reilly
     They speak of so highly


and I don't wonder."

On another occasion Mr. St. Quentin was heard laboriously ascending the
stairs, impeded by his poor wooden leg. He had begun with a wonderful
artificial limb, fitted with springs and other contrivances, but, like
so many other mutilated men, had given that up for a simple stump.

"Look here, Miss Staveley," he said, "I'm in a deuce of a fix. There's
a poor devil downstairs who's brought in a bundle of books worth ten
pounds, and he asks if I'll give ten shillings for them. What am I to
do?"

"Behave like a gentleman," said Ben. "I should say, behave like
yourself."

"Yes," said Patrick, "I want to. But I'm a book seller as well. I hope
I'm not the sort of man to take advantage of ignorance, especially when
it's mixed up with destitution; but, after all, business is business
and one can't be buyer and seller too."

"I think that's rubbish," said Ben. "Of course you can. Every dealer
is, but that's always the excuse. It makes me blush."

Patrick looked at her as though in the hope that he might miss none of
the heightened colour when it came.

"All the same," he said, "the other day when I wasn't in, Jack gave a
fellow a fiver for a book which was only worth sixpence, owing to some
missing pages which he didn't detect."

"I don't see that that has anything to do with the present matter,"
said Ben. "Surely each transaction is separate."

"Yes," said Patrick, resignedly. "You're right. I'm a swine. How I
hate business! None the less," he went on, "this business is only half
mine; half is Jack's. I've got to do the best I can for both of us. Of
course, I shan't give only a measly ten bob; but the point is, how much
more ought I to give?"

"What could you get for the books?" Ben asked.

"They ought to fetch fifteen pounds," said Patrick.

"How soon can you sell them?" Ben asked.

"One never knows," said Patrick. "It might be to-morrow, it might be
next year."

"That's rather important," said Ben, automatically using words that she
didn't know she possessed; "because it might mean locking up capital. I
think you ought to give him something between their value to you if you
could sell at once and their value if you have to keep them in stock
for a year. Say seven pounds ten."

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Patrick. "You're the Queen of Sheba." And he
plodded down again.

"I don't pretend to be able to advise you, Miss Staveley," said Patrick
that evening. "I'm not clever enough. But whenever you're in any
difficulty, come into the shop and we'll try the 'Sortes Virgilianæ.'
It can be very comforting, and it always succeeds."

"Sortes Virgi----" Ben asked. "I suppose that's Latin, and I don't know
any. I've had a rotten education."

"Oh, no," said Patrick, "I don't suppose you have. I expect you know
lots of things that good classical scholars are utterly ignorant of.
You can read and play music at sight, I'm sure?"

Ben admitted it.

"I knew you could. I call that the most miraculous thing in the
world--putting one's fingers down on the notes accurately without
any practice whatever. I'm sure Porson couldn't do that, even if
he did drink ink. Jack can do it too, confound him! It's the one
accomplishment I have always longed for, and I could never even
whistle. But the 'Sortes Virgilianæ'--that was a game of chance and an
appeal for guidance--every copy of Virgil an oracle, you know. It was
like this. You were in a hole. Very well, you opened your Virgil at
random and you took the first words that caught your eye as an inspired
message. But nowadays people don't confine themselves to Virgil: they
take any book. Let's try it. What is your perplexity at the moment?"

"Well," said Ben, "I suppose it would have something to do with getting
clients, being able to be of any use to them when I did get them, and
being able to pay you your rent."

"We'll try," said Patrick, taking a book at random from the shelf
behind him, without turning round, and opening it. He looked at the
page and laughed. "There you are," he said, pointing to the passage.

The book was "The Rubáiyát of Omar Khayyám" and the page was that on
which was the quatrain containing the line:--


     So take the cash and let the credit go.


"But there isn't any cash to take," said Ben.

"No," said Patrick, "but how does it go on?


     Nor heed the rumble of a distant drum.


That is the answer of the oracle. In other words, don't worry, take
long views and if anyone has to suffer, let it be us and not you."

"But what is the drum?" she asked.

"The drum is Jack and me," said Patrick. "Your horrible, avaricious
landlords."




XV


"Someone to see you, Miss Staveley," said Jan, with a flustered face,
suddenly opening Ben's door. "I'm sorry," she added quickly and in a
lower tone, "but I couldn't do anything else."

"This way, sir," she went on, to someone in the outer office, behind
her, and in a moment who should be in the room but Colonel Staveley.

"Father!" exclaimed Ben.

"Well, why not?" replied the Colonel, but he looked anything but at
ease. "Mayn't a father visit his daughter?"

"Of course, father, and I'm very pleased to see you. But it's so
unexpected. I hope nothing's wrong. Please go on smoking."

"Thank you," said the Colonel, who had been careful not to throw his
cigar away, although he had been holding it in such a manner as to
suggest that he had done with it, but absent-mindedly had forgotten to
drop it. He put it back to his lips with a sigh of relief, sat down
and, with a searching eye, looked round at the files of letters and the
folios and other signs of business.

"How are you doing?" he asked.

"Not so well," said Ben, "and not so badly. We are making both ends
meet so far. But it's very hard work. There's so much to do, seeing
people all day, that I never have an evening free. It's then that
the real task begins--writing letters, making up the books and all
the rest of it. Still I like it more than not, and it's interesting
too. One never knows what the next minute may bring. Always something
unexpected. You, for example."

"I'm sorry," said her father, bluntly. "I was hoping you might be tired
of it and be willing to come back."

"Please don't think of that," said Ben. "I shouldn't do that, whatever
happened. There are lots of other things to do if this fails or gets
too difficult. But it won't."

"All right," said the Colonel. "Then perhaps you'll look on me not as a
father but as a client. Do you say client or customer?"

"Whichever you like," said Ben.

"Client, then," replied the Colonel. "What I want is a cook. Not an
ordinary cook, but a damned good cook. You know. A cook who sees
that beef is underdone and mutton well done. A cook who sends any
meat but the very best back to the butcher. A cook who doesn't stuff
apple tarts with cloves and slices of lemon. A cook who keeps time.
Belle--Belle is fine, she's splendid, but she doesn't understand."

Ben laughed. "I wonder how bad your cook is," she said. "You know,
father, you're not the easiest creature to cater for. And--and does
Belle know you're here?"

"Yes," said the Colonel, "I told her."

"All right," said Ben. "I'll do what I can. But, remember, you'll have
to pay. Everything's dearer than it used to be. What does the present
cook get?"

"I think it's fifty," said her father.

"Well, you'll have to go higher than that, for a good one. Very likely
to eighty."

The Colonel groaned. "If I must, I must," he said. "Life isn't worth
living as it is."

"I'll send one along," said Ben.

"You're a good girl," said the Colonel. "I'm proud of you."

"Wait just a moment, father," said Ben, as he rose to go. "You haven't
given me the address of a milliner yet."

"A milliner? What milliner?" the Colonel inquired.

"Where I am to get a hat," said Ben.

"You are talking in riddles," said the Colonel. "I know nothing of any
hat. With a business blooming like this I should say you could get
your hats wherever you wished. In Paris even."

"I thought perhaps you had a special shop in mind," said Ben.

"I haven't an idea what you're referring to," said her father.

"Don't you remember?" Ben replied. "You said that if ever you entered
my office you would give me a hat."

"Did I? I had forgotten. Of course if I said so, it shall be done. I'll
ask Belle about a shop and let you know. What an infernal memory you
have!"

Ben was as good as her word, and a new cook arrived at Hyde Park
Gardens and gave satisfaction.

It is sometimes amusing to watch disapproval dissolving into esteem,
mortification being transformed to pride. Not long after the new
kitchen régime was in full swing the Staveleys gave a dinner party, at
which the Colonel had on his right hand old Lady Philligree (widow of
the famous magnate who had the big place at Moreton-in-the-Marsh). Lady
Philligree is known to like her food as much as most people, and, in
default of anything else to say to her host, or possibly because the
topic came nearest her heart, she commented with intense appreciation
on the entrée they were consuming.

"I'm glad you like it," said the Colonel. "The fact is, we have a new
cook and she's a treasure. It doesn't do to extol one's own family,
but I don't think I am breaking any social law very seriously when I
say that I got her through my daughter. Ben, you know. Well, Ben, like
so many of these headstrong, foolhardy girls to-day--since the War
you know--insisted on breaking away from home and starting a domestic
agency. 'The Beck and Call' she calls it. In Motcombe Street; quite
close to Knightsbridge. Well, although it is not the best form for
fathers to boast, I must say she's wonderful. No sooner did I ask her
for a cook than she got me this one. She ought to make a fortune, she's
so capable. Clearheaded, cool, with a charming manner, though again
I say it as shouldn't. 'The Beck and Call' she calls it. In Motcombe
Street, close to Knightsbridge. Over a book shop."

And when, during the latter part of the feast, after half-time, Mrs.
Carruthers, on his left, paid a compliment to the savoury (an _entente
cordiale_ of chicken's liver and mushroom) the Colonel made practically
the same reply to her.

When we are deploring the inconsistency of human nature and the speed
with which friend can become foe, let us not forget that, under other
circumstances, the transition from adversary to advertising agent can
be equally swift and complete.




XVI


Ben brought me occasional reports of her progress and whatever other
news there might be; and I looked forward to these visits.

"We've been having the oddest applications," she said. "You have no
idea how helpless people can be. They want advice on everything."

"The astonishing thing," I replied, "is that you can give it on such a
variety of subjects."

"I don't know that I can," she said, "but I try to. And if one is
fairly emphatic, it seems to satisfy them. I suppose decisiveness is
very comforting. I see them positively adding an inch or two to their
stature when I just say 'Yes' or 'No,' without any qualifications to
dilute those excellent words. It's extraordinary how few people seem to
have any initiative. And if one can't answer a question oneself," she
went on, "one probably knows someone who can. I am requisitioning all
my friends. Some day I shall put an awkward client on to you."

"I hope you will," I said.

"It isn't only that they ask ridiculous things," Ben confirmed, "but
they so often want something more, for nothing. 'Now that I _am_ here,
they say, 'perhaps you could tell me this.' Only to-day a woman who
had come about Spanish lessons for her daughter asked me, as she was
leaving and had paid, what to do with a cook who stole. I asked her if
she could cook well, and when she said 'Yes,' I told her to keep her,
even if she stole diamonds and pearls. But it was nothing but odds and
ends. 'Odds and ends are replaceable,' I said, 'but a cook isn't. The
whole world wants cooks at this moment. Besides,' I said, 'to take odds
and ends isn't stealing at all--to a cook. We all have our code, and a
cook's code permits her to take odds and ends and smuggle them out of
the house, where she would be a pillar of honesty in the midst, say,
of money or jewellery.' Every one is dishonest somewhere. My father,
I'm sure, is scrupulous in most ways, but he boasts that he always does
railway companies if he can. The best parlourmaids take cigarettes. The
nicest people pocket matches. If you want to know something about petty
purloinings by what are supposed to be the elect, ask the secretary
of any women's club. And I'm told that in quite crack men's clubs the
nailbrushes have to be chained.

"We have every kind of question and from every nationality," she
went on. "A little Japanese woman came in the other day to know how
to get lessons in English--at least, not exactly lessons. What she
wanted was someone to read English books aloud with her. Not _to_ her;
_with_ her. They were to sit side by side so that she could follow
the pronunciation. She knew English perfectly, but had some of the
words most comically wrong. But how natural! Indeed I don't know how
foreigners ever get our words right. This little Japanese pet was
completely puzzled by 'July,' for instance. She used the word as if
it rhymed with 'truly.' And why not? We say 'duly' and 'unduly' and
'unruly' and 'Julius' and 'Juliet.' And then we say, 'July.' It's too
absurd."

"And could you help her?" I asked.

"As it happened, I could. I remembered an old friend of ours who was
only too glad to do it, and she has been writing since to thank me for
giving her the opportunity of meeting anyone so charming."

"What I want to know," I said, "is how the dickens do you know what to
charge?"

"There are several ways," said Ben. "There's a fixed tariff for certain
things, and there's so much a quarter of an hour for interviews. For
shopping I charge a fee. A time-chart is kept and they pay so much an
hour and for cabs. But I don't do that for strangers, or, at any rate,
not for anyone without an introduction.

"Most people," she continued, "want either servants or rooms; and
I send them on to registry offices or house-agents, and share the
commission. I couldn't as a regular thing go into either of those
businesses myself. There would be no time left.

"Let me think of some of our recent applications," she said. "Oh,
yes! A South African woman came in yesterday to know something about
London churches. She was to be here for six months and wanted to take
sittings somewhere; could I tell her the best preachers? They must be
evangelical or, at any rate, low. Anything in the nature of ritualism
she couldn't endure.

"And then," she went on, "there was a widow from Cheltenham who
wanted advice about dogs. What was the best kind of dog for a lady
living alone? She had noticed that the dogs of most ladies of her own
age--that is to say, elderly--were very disobedient; but that would be
no use to her. She did not want a dog that had to be led. I said that
the most popular dog with elderly ladies at the moment was a Sealyham
or West Highland. White, in any case. But I doubted if they were very
obedient.

"She asked whether I thought a lady dog or a gentleman dog the more
suitable. Really, people are marvellous."

"And how did you charge her?" I asked.

"I didn't. I said that the matter was off my beat, and gave her the
address of a dog-fancier.

"She thanked me and went away, and ten minutes later left a box of
chocolates and a bunch of flowers.

"Then they want to know the best musical comedy; the name of a play
that it would be all right to take auntie to; the place to buy the best
linen sheets; whether or not one has to dress in certain restaurants;
what time the National Gallery opens; how long a car takes to Hampton
Court; how to get Sunday tickets for the Zoo; and where one has the
best chance of seeing the Prince of Wales.

"But what most of them want," said Ben, "is what they call a
_pied-à-terre_. You've no idea what hosts of people there are who
would be happy if they only had a foot to the earth!--in other words,
a week-end cottage. The simplest place in the world, where they can
rough it, you know; return to nature, shake the horrible city off!
But when we come to particulars there must always be a tennis lawn,
hot water laid on, bathroom and so forth. Sometimes they insist on
a telephone. I could let twenty of these places a week; and there's
nothing so difficult to find! As it is, most of the real country folk,
the cottagers proper, have been dispossessed in order that their homes
may be converted for week-end purposes.

"Another thing we are always being asked for is a man and his wife. But
they are difficult to get, too, because if the man's any good, the wife
isn't, and if the wife is capable, the man drinks.

"But most of them," she added, "I don't see at all. Jan or Dolly
disposes of them; and of course they don't pay. But we can't be rude to
them. And after all, if you call your office, 'The Beck and Call,' you
are rather, as Dolly says, 'arstin' for it.' In fact, Dolly wants us to
make a charge for everything. He produced some placards the other day,
which he had spent all Sunday on, to be hung up. One was for his own
desk with:--


      LONDON QUESTIONS
       ANSWERED TO THE
     BEST OF OUR ABILITY
         2/6 EACH


on it.

"And one was for Jan:--


     GENERAL INFORMATION
            GIVEN
        2/6 EACH REPLY


"And for my door:--


          MISS STAVELEY
           INTERVIEWS
       AT THE RATE OF 10/6
     FOR QUARTER OF AN HOUR
            OR LESS


"But I wouldn't let him put them up. 'No,' I said. 'Save them for when
you set up in business for yourself.'"

"'Me?' he said. 'Not 'arf. I'm going to be a bookie.' And I expect he
is. 'I'd be one now,' he said, 'if I had any capital. That's all you
want--a little capital to begin with. The rest is like shelling peas.'"

"'But in that case why are you here?' I asked him. 'Oughtn't you to be
in a bookmaker's office?'"

"'I dare say I ought,' he said. 'But I prefer this job at the time.'"

"'Why?' I asked."

"'Because, to tell you the brutal truth, miss,' he replied, 'I like
you.'"




XVII


"No," said the girl. "I don't think anyone would do but Miss Staveley
herself."

She was a pretty girl, somewhere in the last teens, but at the moment
she was flushed and nervous and looked tired out.

"Do you know her personally?" asked the loyal and wary Jan.

"I could hardly say 'know,'" replied the girl, "but we met at a
dinner-party once. At Lady Toulmin's. Perhaps you would tell her?"

"You are quite sure it is nothing that I could do?" Jan inquired.

"Quite," said the girl.

"But Miss Staveley is very busy," Jan persisted. "We haven't got
through the letters yet. Indeed, we're not really open. You must let me
know what you want to see her about."

"I'm sorry," said the girl, "but that's impossible. Do please give her
this card"; and Jan succumbed.

Ben, in her fortress, examined the card. "Miss Viola Marquand," she
read. "What is she like?" she asked.

"Very young," said Jan. "And very pretty. Says she met you at dinner
once at Lady Toulmin's. Her furs cost a hundred if they cost a penny.
One of those gold mesh bags. No rouge, though. She seems excited and
worried."

"And she won't say what she wants?"

"No," said Jan. "Not to me. Not to underlings. The boss or nothing."

"Well," said Ben, "show her in; but keep an eye on the time. She
oughtn't to be here more than ten minutes. Interrupt us then."

Miss Marquand entered shyly. "It's very kind of you to see me," she
said, "and I have no right to bother you like this; but I'm in great
trouble and I remembered how much I liked you the only time we met. Do
you remember?"

"Yes," said Ben. "I remember now."

"And I was hearing that you had opened an advice bureau, and so I have
made so bold as to come to you, because no one wants advice--help,
rather--more than I do."

"Well," said Ben, "tell me."

"It's very simple," said the girl. "I have got to pay two hundred
pounds and I haven't a penny."

"Bridge?" Ben asked.

"Poker," said the girl. "I can hold my own fairly well at bridge, but
poker is too much for me. I've done with it. Can you tell me what to
do? I'm at my wits' end, Miss Staveley. It's terrible."

"You poor thing," said Ben. "But, you know, this isn't my line at all.
I'm here for ordinary cases, such as finding houses and chauffeurs and
all that kind of thing. This isn't my line at all. Have you no one at
home to confide in?"

"Oh, no," said the girl quickly. "No one. That would be impossible."

"Your father?"

"My father!" the girl exclaimed, with dilating eyes. Then she laughed.
"You don't know my father."

"But surely you must have friends?"

"I don't seem to have any friends quite of that sort," said the girl.
"There are plenty of people I know, but some I wouldn't ask a favour
of for the world, and the others either wouldn't have any money or
wouldn't lend it. I've been going over their names again and again and
they all seem wrong."

"Isn't there the family lawyer?" Ben asked. "He wouldn't give you away,
even if he wasn't too sympathetic. And it's part of his business to
raise money."

"The family lawyer!" the girl exclaimed, almost angrily. "You don't
suppose I should bother you if I could go to him? Oh, forgive me if I
sounded sharp," she said. "But I'm all out. I never slept a wink last
night. But of course I couldn't go to him--he and father are much too
thick. And if father knew of this, I don't know what would happen. You
see it happened once before. Not so badly, but badly enough."

"Ah!" said Ben. "And you gave a promise?"

"Yes," the girl admitted. "And I meant to keep it. But this time I
swear I will. What I want you to do," she went on, "is to be so kind as
to tell me how money is raised. Couldn't I borrow it?"

"I'm sure you could," said Ben. "But the rate of interest would be very
high, and how about paying it back?"

"Yes," said the girl, ruefully. "That's just it. I thought of that."

"And you'd have to give some security," said Ben.

"Yes," said the girl. "I thought of that too. Everything's against me."

"What about selling some jewellery? Or better still," Ben asked, "that
mesh bag?"

"It would be noticed at once," said the girl. "No, I've thought of all
those obvious things. And if I were to pawn, I should still have to
find the money to redeem. No, it was because I had come to the end of
thinking that I came to you. If you can't help me I--well, I don't know
what."

She looked utterly broken.

"Well, I must think about it," said Ben, at last. "Give me till
to-morrow morning and come then. But, remember, as I said, this isn't
my real work, and if I am useless you mustn't grumble. Some things are
too difficult."

"How kind you are!" said the girl. "I oughtn't to have worried you
about it. I can see that now. But I was in such a mess. Good-bye till
to-morrow, and if you can't do anything, you can't, and I must----
Well, I don't know what I must do."




XVIII


Ben, left alone, thought, she tells me (to my great pride) first of me.
But I was abroad and without an address. It was a matter, she felt,
that must be discussed with a third person. And it was complicated by
the girl having already given a promise.

By lunch-time she seemed no nearer any course of action, but on her way
through the shop suddenly remembered Patrick's oracle.

"What was that way of getting guidance called?" she asked him. "When
you told me not to bother about ever paying my rent?"

"Was it as definite as that?" he asked. "I'd forgotten." He laughed.
"The 'Sortes Virgilianæ,'" he went on. "Every one his own diviner. If
you're in a difficulty, try it again. Take any book at random and read
where it opens."

Ben put out her hand and found that it had alighted upon "Coleridge's
Poems."

"Now open it and glance quickly," said Patrick.

Opening it, Ben's eyes came instantly upon "The Ancient Mariner."

"Do I have to read the whole page?" she asked.

"No," said Patrick. "The title is enough. Isn't it helpful?"

"I don't see how," said Ben, and she left the shop.

"It's never failed yet," he called after her. "Either up or down, it's
bound to work."

At intervals during the rest of the day Ben repeated the words "ancient
mariner," "ancient mariner," "venerable salt," "antique navigator,"
"senile sailor." Nothing suggested anything. Perhaps, she thought,
it means the sea. But what could the sea do for Miss Marquand? She
couldn't--no, impossible--have meant to suggest committing suicide; and
certainly she was not going to run away: that was not a solution to
this kind of problem. Facing the music here.

Ancient mariner, ancient mariner.... Ben racked her brains to think
of any elderly naval men that she might know. There was her father's
friend, the Admiral, old Sir Albert Ross; but he was dead. Nor had he
possessed a very sympathetic or understanding mind. The quarter-deck
manner. "Damn it," he would have said, "you've got to take your
punishment. People who play cards for stakes they can't afford get no
pity from me." Well, the Admiral was dead, anyway.

Ancient mariner, ancient mariner. What was the next thing to a real
mariner? Why, a longshoreman, a boatman on the river. And the next
thing to the real sea? The Thames. Ought she to go down to the docks
and see what happened there? But why the Thames? Why not a lake? There
were boats on the Serpentine, close by, and this was a lovely evening
and the attendants would certainly be there and one of them might be
old. In fact they were sure to be old. And in conversation something
useful might occur.

Ben was on her way to the Serpentine when she thought of the Round
Pond, and in a second Coleridge's meaning flashed upon her. Of course.
Why hadn't she thought of it at once? Uncle Paul. Uncle Paul was the
only ancient mariner in her acquaintance: Uncle Paul with his toy
boats, and, even more, Uncle Paul with his kind old heart and wise if
simple old head. She would go to see him directly after dinner. Of
course!

Uncle Paul, if he had known of Ben's approach, could not have been
employed more suitably, both for her and for Coleridge, for he was
rigging a ship. A three-masted schooner. And he looked quite old enough
to be called ancient.

"Well, my dear," he said. "How nice of you to call!"

He moved away from the model and fetched the cigarettes.

"Please don't stop, Uncle Paul," said Ben. "I shall be much happier if
you go on with your work. In fact, you must. And it isn't nice of me to
call, really. Because I've come for advice. To bother you."

"Don't apologize for that," he said. "People like to be asked for
advice. It's flattering."

Ben told him the whole story--without names--while his busy fingers
were deftly binding spars and threading cordage through tiny blocks.

"And she struck you as being all right?" he asked at the end. "You felt
the thing to be genuine? She really seemed to mean it when she said
that this time it really was the end of her gambling?"

"Absolutely," said Ben.

"She must be helped," said Uncle Paul, and he went to his desk and
wrote a cheque for two hundred pounds made out to his niece. "Give her
this. But see that she pays it back to you, no matter in how small
instalments, beginning with her next allowance. I'm afraid she must
deny herself a lot of little luxuries; but that will be good for her.
Yes," he said, "she ought to go without all kinds of things she's used
to. But you'll talk to her like a mother and tell her so, of course."

"A mother!" Ben exclaimed. "Why, I'm not more than three years older."

"Age has nothing to do with it," said Uncle Paul.

"You are the sweetest thing," said Ben, as she folded the cheque and
put it in her bag. And she hurried home.

"Well," said Patrick, putting his head in at Ben's door the next
afternoon, "did it work?"

"To perfection," said Ben.

"It's a wonderful method," said Patrick.

"I prefer it to all others," said Ben. "And, by the way, I've got a new
assistant. A Miss Marquand. We're getting on, you see."




XIX


Miss Marquand had only been working at "The Beck and Call" for a week
or so when Toby, Ben's youngest brother, paid his sister a visit.

"How nice to see you," said Ben, "but I hope you haven't come, like all
the others, to reproach me for opening the place."

"Not me," said Toby. "I'm all for it. I want you to be in business and
make money, because then I can borrow from you."

"My dear," said Ben, "are you broke again?"

"Absolutely," said her brother. "But have they really been pitching
into you?"

"All of them but Uncle Paul," said Ben. "Even Aunt Agatha, but of
course she doesn't count."

"Alicia, I suppose, wanted you to join her in Hove?" Toby inquired.

"Yes," said Ben, with surprise. "But how could you know?"

"I guessed it," said Toby. "I'm not such a fool as I look."

"I didn't know you were so clever," said Ben. "Did you also guess that
poor Bertrand is alive?"

"Alive? What on earth do you mean?" Toby asked.

"I don't mean anything on earth," said Ben. "That's just it. Alicia's
taken to spiritualism and she communicates with him every day."

Toby whistled. "That's topping," he said. "They ought to know
everything up there: I wonder if I could get her to ask him for a
winner."

"My dear boy," said Ben, "are you betting again?"

"Only now and then," he said. "And I have such rotten luck. It would
pay owners to make me an allowance to keep off their horses. But
what I came about," he went on, "is what is called my future. I wish
you'd talk to the governor about it. He's dead set on my going into
Uncle Arthur's office when I come down; but that means all kinds of
restrictions. And how am I to keep up my cricket? I want to play
seriously for a few seasons; they've got me down for Middlesex. I
can see now that I've been rather an ass not working harder. I might
have got a job then as a Sports Master at some big school, but even a
Sports Master, it seems, must know something. There's always a catch
somewhere. So far as the winter goes, I'm not so hopeless, because
you can get jobs now as Master of Ceremonies at the Swiss hotels--to
arrange dancing and ice competitions. I know two or three men who do
that and have a topping time."

It was at this moment that the door of Ben's room opened and Miss
Marquand's head appeared round it.

What else may be the answer to the poet's question, "Who ever loved
that loved not at first sight?" it is not Toby. For that had always
been his only way, and it happened again at that moment.

"Good Heavens!" he exclaimed when the door had closed again. "Who's
that?"

"That's one of my assistants," said Ben; "and you will oblige me by not
taking her out to lunch more than you can help, because we're busy.
Also, you can't afford it. Also, she may be already engaged."

"But she's beautiful," said Toby. "She's terrific. What's her name?"

"Her name is Viola Marquand," said Ben.

"Viola Marquand! Great Scott! Why, I know her brother. He's at New. She
isn't engaged, or if she is, he doesn't know it."

"Why should he?" Ben asked. "_You_ don't know all that _I_ do."

"He's told me about her," said Toby. "He said I should fall for her and
I have. Do ask her to come in again about something."

"Not unless you make a promise," said Ben.

"Well?" Toby asked.

"And keep it?" Ben said.

"Naturally," Toby replied. "If it isn't too difficult."

"Not to have another bet this year," said Ben.

"Oh, I say!" said Toby. "That's a bit thick."

"I mean it," said Ben.

Toby knitted his fresh and candid brows.

"I may go in for a Derby sweep or two?" he asked.

"Yes," said Ben. "I'll allow that. But no betting. Promise?"

Toby promised and Ben rang her bell twice.

The door opened again and Miss Marquand's piquant little face again
appeared.

"Oh, Miss Marquand," said Ben, "please come in. This is my brother
Toby, and if you have a minute will you let him see the morning paper.
He is interested in racing and wants to look at to-day's runners."

"My hat!" Toby gasped. "Ben, you're the limit." But his eyes were on
Miss Marquand, and if ever a second sight corroborated the judgment of
the first, it was then.

The introductions being completed, Ben relented. "Never mind about the
paper," she said. "I was only joking." Toby groaned.

"But," she went on, "what my brother really wants is to consult the
'Scholastic Register.' Will you let him see it?"

And the young people left together.




XX


Tommy Clinton arriving as usual from Madeira in May, paid an early
visit to "The Beck and Call," dallying awhile at the book shop, to
whose allurements had now been added a few water-colours; and for
water-colours Tommy had ever had a weakness. Indeed, he played a little
with a paint-box himself.

"What on earth made you start this kind of thing?" he asked Ben, when
their first greetings were over.

"Why not?" she countered. "I couldn't be idle. It's rather fun too."

"I suppose you've got some kind of a lease?" Tommy asked. "You're bound
to let the experiment run a certain time?"

"Of course," said Ben. "I shouldn't drop it unless I had to."

Tommy was silent. These hostages to fortune did not suit him in the
least.

"Is the fellow downstairs your landlord?" he asked.

"I take this floor from the book shop, if that's what you mean," said
Ben, smiling at Tommy's transparency. "Did you go in there?"

"I just looked round," he said. "I didn't speak to anyone.
Conceited-looking chap, I thought, and singing too; something about
O'Reilly. I can't stand shopkeepers who don't look like it, and sing.
Shopkeepers should wear black, and rub their hands. This fellow's in
tweeds with a blue collar."

"That's Mr. Harford," said Ben. "His partner, Mr. St. Quentin, would
have pleased you more: he's only got one leg. They were at Oxford
together and then in the War."

"You seem to know all about them," said Tommy, with some bitterness.
"Are they married?"

"Oh, no," said Ben.

"Are they engaged?" Tommy pursued.

"If you mean, Are they engaged to me? No," said Ben.

"Neither of them?" he asked.

"Neither or both," she replied. "You seem to have missed your
vocation," she added, laughing. "You ought to have been a
cross-examiner. In fact, I believe you are--very cross."

"I'm frightfully sorry," said Tommy; "but it's awfully disappointing
coming back and finding you locked up in an office. I was counting on
seeing such a lot of you, and now you say you've only got Saturday
afternoons."

"We must make the most of those," she said.

It was on their way back from a country walk that Tommy took Ben's hand
and repeated his annual question.

"What about it?" he said.

"About what?" Ben asked, with an affectation of ignorance which was not
really intended to deceive him.

"'You 'eard,'" he quoted.

She disengaged her hand and laughed her soft laugh.

"I can't think why you're so horrid to me," he said. "What's the matter
with me?"

"Nothing, Tommy," she said. "I like you very much. I always have liked
you. But I don't want to marry you."

"Don't you want to marry anyone?" he asked.

"No one that I've yet seen," she replied.

"Not either of those book-selling fellows?" he asked.

"Certainly not," she said.

"But you must marry," said Tommy, very earnestly. "Of course you must.
It isn't right not to. What's the matter with me, anyway? We've always
been good friends; I'm not too poor; I hope I've got something better
than the kind of face that only a mother can love. I've got _two_
legs. Why are you so down on me?"

"My dear boy, I'm not," said Ben. "I have always liked you and I always
shall like you, but marriage is so different. Please don't ask me any
more, there's a dear, Tommy."

She had said "Certainly not" with some firmness to Tommy's question
about her landlords; but was it true? She pondered on the matter
that night as she lay awake. Was she so insensitive to them? Would
she absolutely turn down a proposal from either? And if she had a
preference for one, which was it? Mr. Harford, so quick and gay and
handsome and clean cut and impulsive, or Mr. St. Quentin, so quiet and
amusing and lonely and in need of care? But whosoever she married, if
she married at all--and why should she, for her life was very full of
interest; this "Beck and Call" affair was very absorbing and it had got
to be made a success; and marriage seemed so often to be the end of
girls; look at poor Enid Stuart, what a wreck of a life that used to be
such a lark; look at poor Daisy Forsiter, all her jolliness gone since
she married that selfish young Greg--time enough to think of marriage
two or three years hence when she was tired of being so busy.

So her thoughts ran.

Poor Tommy! Whosoever she married, if she married at all, would have to
have more variety than that, be more of a companion. If she married at
all. Someone who did everything with an air, with a natural commanding
address, like, well, Jack Harford was rather like that--"Good morning,
O'Reilly, you are looking well"--someone who had humour and sagacity
and was in need of mothering a little like--well, Pat St. Quentin was
not unlike that--"My bonnie lies over the sea." But there were plenty
of other men, too, if she really wanted one, and it was ridiculous to
allow such a trifling business accident as renting an upper floor from
two young men to make these two young men the inevitable two from which
she had to choose a partner for life. What rubbish!




XXI


Ben chanced to be in the front office one morning when two children
came in: a boy and a girl. They looked about twelve and ten.

"Well?" she asked.

"We came in," said the boy, "because we've got a domestic problem and
we thought you would help. We saw the sign."

"Of course I will," said Ben. "If I can. Is it very difficult?"

"It is rather," said the little girl. "It's Dad's and Mum's birthday
to-morrow and we don't know what to give them."

"But surely," said Ben, "they don't both have their birthday on the
same day?"

"Yes, they do," said the boy. "It's extraordinary, but they do."

"I think it's perhaps why they married each other," said the little
girl.

"It's the most amazing coincidence I ever heard of," said Ben. "Are you
sure they're not pretending?"

"Quite sure," said the boy. "Dad and Mum never pretend. And I don't
think anybody would pretend a thing like that, because it doesn't
really do them any good. You see it--it puts such a strain on our
pocket-money--Eva's and mine--to have their birthdays come both
together like this."

"The worst thing of all," said Eva, "is to have a birthday on Christmas
day. Every one knows that."

"When is your birthday?" Ben asked.

"On Christmas Day," said Eva.

"What a marvellous family!" exclaimed Ben. "And when is yours?" she
asked the boy. "On February 29th, I suppose?"

"Yes," he said, "on February 29th. I only have a birthday once in four
years. I mean a real one. Of course, as a matter of fact, people are
very lenient."

"More and more remarkable!" exclaimed Ben. "I never heard anything like
it. And are you the only children?"

"Yes," said Eva.

"Before I can help you," said Ben, "I must know how much money you've
got."

"We've got five shillings each," said the boy. "But of course we can't
spend all that on the present because we must give some to you. Mustn't
we?"

"Why?" Ben asked.

"It says so on the signboard," said the boy. "'Terms moderate.' Terms
mean we must pay, don't they?"

"Not in every case," said Ben. "Not in this case. Any advice I can give
to you is free, because I'm so sorry about your birthdays. But I can't
advise until I know everything, so you must tell me. First about your
mother. Tell me all about her tastes. Is she fond of reading?"

"Yes," said Eva.

"New books or old?"

"New books," said Eva. "They come from the library. French books too."

"Is she fond of flowers?"

"Yes," said Eva, "she likes tulips."

"And has she any favourite colours?"

"A kind of purply pink," said Eva, after consideration.

"No," said Eric, firmly; "yellow. All the French books are yellow, and
that proves it."

"Does she write a lot of letters?" Ben asked.

"Not many," Eva thought.

"Does she play and sing?"

"Oh, yes, she loves music," said Eva.

"And now for your father," said Ben. "Is he old?"

"Yes, very old," said Eva.

"How old?"

"Well, quite twenty-eight," said Eva.

"He's much older than that," said Eric; "he's going to be thirty-five;
he said so this morning."

"And what is he fond of?" asked Ben. "Is he fond of golf?"

"He plays golf," said the boy, "but he's chiefly fond of fishing. He's
always going off to fish at a place called Stockbridge."

"What is his favourite food?" Ben asked.

After a good deal of difference of opinion and some heat, it was
decided that their father was most addicted to eggs, of which he ate
two every morning boiled for four minutes.

"And do you want to join in these presents?" Ben asked, "and give
each of them one that costs five shillings, or do you want to be
independent?"

This led to more debate and more heat, and it was at last settled
that they would rather not unite but would deal separately with their
parents.

"Very well," said Ben, "this is what I suggest. That one of you
should give your father a little old book on fishing which we will
get downstairs, and the other should give him two very pretty china
egg-cups. And one should give your mother a box of purple sealing-wax
for her letters (which is a good kind of present because very likely
she'll let you help with the sealing), and the other should give her a
little bottle of the best lavender water. And I'm very glad you called
to ask me. Where do you live?"

"Close by, in Eaton Square," said the boy. "We pass here every day and
we've always wanted to come in, but we've never had a real domestic
problem before."

"And what do you collect?" Ben asked. "Because every boy collects
something, doesn't he?"

"Motor-cars," said Eric.

"Motor-cars!" Ben exclaimed.

"He doesn't mean the cars themselves," said Eva. "Really, Eric, you are
so silly! What he means is, he writes down in a book the numbers of all
the cars he sees and the names of the makers of all he knows. I wish he
wouldn't," she added, sadly; "it makes our walks so dreary for me."

"It's the only thing that makes walks possible," said Eric.

They started to go out. At the door the boy stopped. "Are you sure we
oughtn't to pay you something?" he asked.

"Quite," said Ben.

"I think you're a wonderful adviser," said Eva.




XXII


"You must pardon me for intruding without any real business reason,"
said the pretty woman, "but I want to apologize for my children
worrying you the other day. About birthday presents."

"Oh, yes," said Ben. "They were yours, then?"

"Yes," said her visitor, "but they had no right to take up your time
like that."

"I was delighted that they did," said Ben. "Children are very rare
in this business. It's a very pleasant change after the usual run of
clients. And I thought it very clever of them to think of coming to me
at all. Very few children would be so original."

"My name is Hill-Owen, and we live just round the corner in Eaton
Square," said the visitor. "And since I _am_ here, I wonder if you
would give me advice as to my cook. She's young and very pretty, and
she cooks very well, but she's terribly attractive to Guardsmen. I
suppose good cooks are as difficult to find as ever?"

"More so," said Ben. "It's not part of my business. This isn't a
registry office. But from the inquiries I get, I should say that the
world's greatest need at this moment is cooks."

"Then you agree with my husband," said Mrs. Hill-Owen, "who says,
'Never mind about the Guardsmen so long as dinner is all right'?"

"I should take some precautions," said Ben. "I don't think Guardsmen
ought to be there after ten, say."

"Guardsmen are very difficult to dislodge," said Mrs. Hill-Owen, "and
I'm afraid to go down and interfere, she's so touchy. She might give
notice. It's the worst of this Knightsbridge district. I thought of a
wonderful plan the other day, and that was to make her bring the key of
the basement door up at ten every night; but as my husband said, 'How
can you tell she's locked it?' It's really a terrible responsibility.
And we're away so much too. What would you do?"

"I?" said Ben. "I should do my best to forget."

"Would you? How clever of you! Thank you so much. I'll try to."

This was one of Ben's odd days.

Mrs. Hill-Owen (she told me) had not been gone more than a few minutes
when a Rolls Royce purred up to the door of "The Booklovers' Rest," and
a richly dressed young woman emerged and made her way upwards to "The
Beck and Call."

Ben, chancing to be in the front office, received her in person, and
asked her requirements.

"I want," said the girl, "an engagement as parlour-maid."

"_You_ want?" Ben exclaimed. "But for someone else, of course."

"Oh, no," said the girl. "For myself. I want to go into service."

"Come inside," said Ben. "I must get this clear. You want," she said,
when they were seated, "a situation as a parlour-maid?"

"Yes," said the girl. "But it must be in a really good house--a
nobleman's for choice."

Ben's surprise led the girl to be confidential.

"I ought to explain," she said, "especially as I've had no experience
of anything but helping mother at home. The fact is dad has suddenly
become rich--enormously rich--and everything has changed. We used to
live in a little house in Ealing, but now dad's bought one of those
great places on Kingston Hill. He's happy enough, pottering about the
garden, but it's very lonely for mother and me, because many of our
old friends have disappeared--frightened, I suppose--and we can't make
new ones of the new kind because--well, we're not easy with them. We
don't know how to behave or what to say. They've called, you see. So
I thought it would be a wonderful thing if I took service in a good
family and kept my eyes open. I'm very quick; I should soon pick it up;
and someone was saying that 'The Beck and Call' was the best place to
come to with any inquiry, so I came. What do you think, miss?"

"You would have to keep your secret," said Ben.

"Oh, yes, of course," the girl replied.

"You'd have to leave that car behind."

"I shall love to," said the girl. "It's largely because of the
chauffeur that I want to learn. He's so superior. Mother and dad, of
course, will never be able to deal with servants, but I feel that after
a little while I shall know enough to keep them in their place. And of
course when I'm through we shall have new ones, and so start fair."

"Well," said Ben, "I think it's a most original plan. The principal
difficulty is the noblemen. They're all so poor now that they probably
do their own parlour-maiding. I know one personally who describes
himself as the 'Gentleman with a duster,' and one of the most famous
of our dukes boasts that he cleans the windows. You would take the
lowest wages, of course?"

"Oh, yes," said the girl; "or none at all."

"No," said Ben, "that would be very foolish. Never do that. You would
be suspected at once; and if the other servants found out they would be
impossible to you. By the way, had you thought of the other servants?"

"Oh, yes."

"The footman?"

"Yes. But I've got to go through with it, and I'm very quick. You don't
think it's unfair to the people who engage me to use them in this way?"

"No, I don't think so. All life is a lesson, and this is quite funny.
But the real joke will come when you meet them later on, on level
terms."

"Oh," said the girl, "how terrible! I never thought of that. I must--I
must think a little more about it," she added, "and talk to mother."

She went off, and Ben watched the chauffeur's face as she got into the
car. It certainly had an expression that needed very drastic treatment.




XXIII


"I don't want to be inquisitive or interfering," said Ben to Viola
Marquand, "but I think we ought to be frank with each other about Toby.
I'm afraid that that engagement ring is his?"

Viola looked a little confused, but admitted it.

"And what are your plans?" Ben asked. "How long are you prepared to
wait for him, and what do you propose to live on? Don't mind those
questions, but I feel rather responsible for both of you. I'm all the
mother that Toby's got, and to some extent I am in charge of you as
well, aren't I? Besides, I suppose I might be said to have thrown you
together."

"Of course I don't mind," said Viola. "You've been far too kind. I like
Toby tremendously. I don't say I was anxious to be engaged, but he was
miserable till I said yes."

"I'm sure he was," said Ben. "He specializes in misery over delays. But
what do you think he can do? And what will your people say?"

Viola became very grave. "Yes," she said, "what, indeed? They are
sufficiently cross that I am here doing work; but that I don't mind.
Girls have to expect that. I dare say you had some trouble yourself?"

Ben smiled. "Just at first," she said. "But fathers soon forget.
They've got other things to think about."

"Mine doesn't seem to have," said Viola. "He's bent on my marrying
someone rich, and he's afraid that working here may prejudice rich men
against me."

"That's absurd," said Ben. "Men who want to marry pretty girls can't
be prejudiced against them by anything; that is if they really want to
marry them. People do what they want. Don't you agree?"

"Yes," said Viola, "I think I do. But it wouldn't convince father.
Father hasn't much imagination, I'm afraid, and when he gets an idea he
sticks to it."

"And your mother?" Ben asked.

"Mother does what she's told," said Viola. "Poor mother! We shan't all
grow like that, I hope."

"Not if you marry Toby," said Ben. "Toby may be capricious and rather
tiresome, but he'll never dictate. Toby's idea of marriage is to be
deliciously, luxuriously enslaved. But if I were you I shouldn't wear
that ring. He's too young. If you take my advice--and I don't think
you are so deeply in love as to refuse to--you will give it back to
him and say that you will wait a year before you ask for it again, if
then."

"But it will break the poor child's heart," said Viola.

"Not more than is good for him--and for both of you," said Ben. "Think
it over, anyway. If you made it a condition that he was earning enough
money for both of you--or was in the way to do so--it would be all
to the good. His whole tendency is to take things too easily, which
wouldn't matter so much if he wasn't engaged. But, being engaged, he
must work."

"It sounds frightfully sensible," said Viola. "And not at all like me."

"Well, your father would say the same," said Ben, "and very definitely
too. It's inevitable if you admit the engagement. How much better for
you to suggest it amicably!"

"I'll try," said Viola. "But it's rather rough luck."

She drew the ring slowly off her finger and looked wistfully at the
mark it had left.

"You really are fond of him?" Ben asked.

"I think so," said Viola.

"It's so difficult," said Ben, in one of the worst sentences ever
constructed, "for sisters to understand anyone losing their heads over
their brothers."




XXIV


It was early in June that I had an urgent call from Ben asking if I
would help her. A Canadian woman had been in to say that her husband,
who was an invalid, had one mastering wish, and that was to hear the
nightingale again before he returned home, probably for ever. Ben knew
nothing of nightingales; but she wanted to oblige, and would I take
the affair in hand?--my acquaintance with those birds being (I assume)
notorious.

I agreed.

Mr. Measure was rather a tragic figure. A wealthy Canadian of cultured
tastes, he had been stricken when only in the fifties, and this was a
last visit to Europe to see once again the beautiful things that he
knew so well and would regret so keenly. For "Dying," as he said to me,
"would be nothing if were it not for what we leave behind."

They had been to Florence, to Siena, to Perugia, to Venice, to Rome, to
little quiet places among the Italian hills that had old associations,
to Chamounix again, to Avignon and Arles, to Puy-de-Dôme. In a day or
so they were to sail for Quebec, where his home was and where his grave
would be.

He had but one wish left as regarded his English visit, and that was to
hear the nightingale. It had suddenly come to him as he read in a paper
some reference to their season of song--he had had the idea that it was
earlier and now finished--and his wife had chanced upon Ben's signboard
and had asked for information there: as it happened, very fortunately.

I called at their hotel to discuss our plan of action. Mr. Measure,
poor fellow, was clearly very ill; he was thin and weak, but his eye
was bright and he was full of enthusiasm for the adventure. He did not
want to sleep in a country inn, but did not mind how late he returned
to London. Would I mind driving in a motor ambulance with himself and
his wife?

Not at all.

His idea was that we should leave London after a very early dinner and
go straight to a likely spot, hear the nightingale, and drive back. If
we heard one sooner, so much the better.

"I know of a practically certain place," I said, "but it is a little
late. A fortnight ago would have been better. Remember, I can't
promise."

It was a favourable evening on which we slid away from Mr. Measure's
hotel. I had my mind on a particular meadow in Sussex, just north of
the Downs, skirted by a lane. This meadow is surrounded by a high,
untrimmed hedge with oaks at intervals, and there is a tinkling stream
close by. A few cottages here and there in the neighbourhood complete
the nightingales' requirements, for they are fond of human sounds. In
this meadow, which has never disappointed me yet--at any rate in late
April and all May--nightingales have the enchanting habit of singing in
threes, one against the other at the points of the triangle.

Knowing by bitter experience how useless it is to squander minute
directions on such insensitive, non-receptive, unobservant, and
unremembering creatures as chauffeurs, I sat on the box; not sorry
either, for it was warm, and talking in a car is fatiguing.

We left London by way of Battersea Bridge and kept on the Brighton
road as far as Hand Cross--over Walton Heath and down Reigate Hill
and through Crawley. At Hand Cross we branched to the right, leaving
Cuckfield on our left, and came through Bolney to Albourne and due
south as far as Muddles Wood cross-roads. At intervals I had fancied I
heard the magic notes and had slackened the car--you know how easy it
is to imagine this sound--but always it was a false alarm, or the song
had been only of momentary duration.

At Muddles Wood we turned to the right. The air was warm and there
was no wind, only a sighing of the earth. The moon was now bright and
the great bulk of the South Downs, sweetly undulating, rose against
the quiet sky. We crept slowly along for a quarter of a mile and then
dipped sharp to the left for fifty yards and stopped. This was the spot.

For a while there was not a sound, save now and then a rustle in the
undergrowth, the whistle of a far-distant train, a car on the Henfield
road, an owl's hoot, or a dog barking.

I had begun to be assured of the worst when there came a liquid note.
Then silence again; and then suddenly a burst of song. It was very
brief, and there was again a disconcerting silence; but then another
singer replied, and gradually their songs grew more steady. They
behaved like angels; they went through everything in the repertory, and
although their voices were not in the perfection of mid-May, they were
beautiful enough, and one of them repeated that plaintive single cry
seventeen times.

Even the chauffeur was impressed. He had heard about nightingales all
his life, but this was his first experience of them. Like a canary,
wasn't it?

I did not intrude upon the sick man until the time came to go. He was
in an ecstasy and I wished that Ben could see him. It would have been a
triumph for "The Beck and Call."

"But I should call that song a happy one," he said. "Certainly not
melancholy, except very rarely. Its charm is its volume and exultation,
and the careless ease of it."

I agreed. "I am against Matthew Arnold here," I said. "To me the truest
line about the bird in our poetry is in William Cory:--


     Still are thy pleasant voices, thy nightingales, awake.


That's what they are: pleasant voices, triumphantly 'telling the
world.'"

"Even Keats," he said, "makes the song a little too voluptuous and
passionate, although how true to say that the nightingale 'among the
leaves' has never known


     The weariness, the fever, and the fret!"


He paused, and then repeated, almost in a whisper, the lines:--


     Now more than ever it seems rich to die,
     To cease upon the midnight with no pain,
     While thou art pouring forth thy soul aloud
     In such an ecstasy!


To me, though he was but a stranger, these lines, as he murmured them,
were, since I knew his secret, infinitely pathetic; to his poor wife
they must have meant anguish.

The next morning I called at the hotel to see how Mr. Measure was and
to bid him good-bye. He re-expressed his gratitude for the night's
entertainment, and said he should die with that music in his ears. I
reproved him for talking of dying soon with such certainty.

"Dying men," he said, "can prepare for death with more courage,
composure, and acceptance than those who watch them, and I have no
doubt that you are sorrier for me than I am for myself. Not that I want
to die, but I know I must. I won't be insincere about it. I know I am
going to die very shortly after reaching home, because I have the means
of death always with me. I know that my trouble is incurable and that
it is getting worse. Would you have me a burden on those around me? My
mind, as I grow weaker, will be less clear, less trustworthy; would you
cherish decay?"

I had no rebutting argument to set up.

"I have always," he went on, "dreaded this disease, and when I was hale
and strong I prepared accordingly. I have no fears; any postponement
is due to the fact that I want to see my lawyer again and be at home.
Otherwise I should take a dose to-day.

"The greatest drawback to suicide," he continued, with a whimsical
smile, "is not want of decision, but a dislike of giving trouble. If
I were to commit suicide now, it would have to be done in a hotel,
and that isn't fair to the hotel. Nor should I care to be found lying
in a field: that would mean a shock to someone and too much newspaper
squalor after. Also a public mortuary. In any well-organized State
there would, of course, be a great pool of quicklime into which, after
taking poison, we could roll; but lacking that we must behave ourselves
as best we can. By waiting till I get to Canada, I can complete my
will, fold my arms, and die like a gentleman in bed."

"While admiring," I replied, "your determination and nice taste, I
would remind you that next spring the nightingales will be singing
again. You might still be alive and well enough to hear them."

"I refuse," he said, "to linger on, a wreck."

And so passed Mr. Adrian Measure from my life.




XXV


"Dear Miss Staveley," ran the note which Ben found on her desk, "will
you do me the divine favour of coming to the theatre with me this
evening? If so, name your play, and I will fetch you at your rooms at
7.5, and we will dine first. I do so hope you are free and that the
notion likes you."

"Yours sincerely,
"JOHN HARFORD"


Ben accepted.

It was a very smart Mr. Harford who drove up to Aubrey Walk that
evening and carried her off to dinner. The tweeds had given place to
superlative dress clothes and a white waistcoat; and there was no dog.

He went upstairs for a moment to be introduced to Melanie, who had
insisted on this ceremony. "And later," she had said, "I want to see
the other one too."

"Why?" Ben asked.

"Just curiosity," said Melanie. "It is always interesting to see the
men who fall in love with one's friends. And these two seem to be so
different that it is more interesting than ever. Why don't you marry
both?"

"Have I ever given you any reason to suppose I should marry either?"
Ben asked.

"Plenty," said Melanie.

"How ridiculous you are!" said Ben. She was really rather annoyed. "I
am so tired of this notion that men and women who are friendly must be
going to marry."

"It is doubtful, however," said Melanie, "if any weariness on your part
will lessen the popularity of union between the sexes."

"Oh, Melanie, shut up!" said Ben. "How tired I am also of that word
'sexes'!"

"None the less, old dear," said Melanie, "there it is, and it's come to
stay. And to a large extent that's why I've got to eat my dinner alone
this evening."

"Again I say, shut up!" said Ben.

"How extraordinarily different you and Miss Ames are!" said Jack, as
the cab started. "And yet she's very nice too. But she's so detached,
so cool, so ironical."

"She's a very close observer under it all," said Ben.

"I'm rather scared of her," said Jack.

"What becomes of Soul when you go out in the evening?" Ben asked.

"He mopes," said Jack. "I've got an excellent landlady, who does
her best to keep him happy, but he has no life away from me really.
Sometimes when I walk and go to the pit, I take him to the theatre
and leave him with friendly commissionaires; but it isn't a kindness
because, as I can't give him any notion of how long I shall be, he
spends the time in searching the appearance of every passer-by.
Considering how near the ground his eyes are, this must be a very
tiring and anxious occupation."

"But when you do arrive, his joy makes up for everything," Ben
suggested.

"Yes," said Jack. "Dogs have wonderful compensations. Still, I doubt if
the Fates were quite kind to them to make them at once so understanding
and so dumb, or to us to make them so short-lived. You like them, don't
you?"

"I adore them," said Ben.

"Would you care to have Soul?" Jack asked. It was a terrible wrench,
but he asked it. ("Love my dog, love me.")

"Oh, no," said Ben. "Never! If ever a dog belonged to one person,
and one only, it is Soul. And even if I accepted him, he would still
be yours. He would be too loyal to transfer any but superficial
affections. But you are very generous to make the offer at all," she
added, "and I shall never forget it."

Melanie was sitting up when Ben returned. She was one of those girls
who prefer the small hours.

"How do you find Mr. Harford?" she asked.

"He's very jolly," said Ben.

"Yes, but has he got anything to say?"

"Not very much," said Ben. "He isn't quite grown up. Such lots of young
Englishmen aren't. I suppose it's this domination of the ball which
keeps them boys. French youths, who don't play games, always look so
old. But he's very nice and kind."

"I'll bet he didn't try to kiss you in the cab," said Melanie.

"Certainly not," said Ben. "Why should he?"

"So many of them want to," said Melanie. "But the older ones chiefly.
All the same," she added, "if you're not careful you'll very shortly
have the chance of offering to be a sister to him."

"I wish you wouldn't be so absurd," said Ben. "Your suspicious nature
smirches everything. Mr. Harford likes me, I know, but that's all."

"Was he always as smart as that?" Melanie inquired.

"I don't know," said Ben. "I've never seen him in evening clothes
before."

"And he made no overtures to-night? Will you swear?"

"Of course," said Ben.

"He didn't offer you his spaniel or anything like that?"

"Oh, Melanie, how horrid you are!" Ben exclaimed as she banged the door.

Melanie chuckled.




XXVI


The Wimbledon tournament now being over, in which Tommy Clinton had
survived but two rounds, that young gentleman was only too free to
devote his time to Ben, and it was therefore the more galling to him
to find her so busy. He called so frequently that Mr. Harford was
constrained to mention the fact.

"You will excuse me, Miss Staveley," he said one afternoon after Tommy
had left, "but would you mind if we put a ladder against the wall for
your friend to come and leave by?"

"Which friend?" Ben asked.

"The affable gent in the Panama hat," said Mr. Harford, "who is here
most days and walks through our modest but well-conducted premises as
if they were a pig-sty. We don't mind a man despising the treasures of
literature; reading is, after all, a matter of taste; but we do bar
the way he scowls at us. Even Pat, mild and tolerant as he is, almost
squared up to him to-day. My own idea is to exchange this poor little
creature here--who shares the besetting sin of all spaniels in being
too ready to make indiscriminate friends--for a man-eating mastiff.
What's his quarrel with us, anyway? Does he dislike us personally or
did a book seller once try to do him in?"

Ben laughed. "Poor Tommy!" she said. "Be a little patient, he's going
back to Madeira next week."

"An excellent place for him," said Mr. Harford.

Ben herself found Tommy rather a trial, for he not only looked at her
with such hungry hopelessness, but he took up a great deal of valuable
time.

His next visit was a veritable ordeal.

"Look here, Ben," he said, "I've been working for you since I was here
last and I think you'll agree that I've been rather useful. Of course
I hate your being in this business--the very phrase 'Beck and Call'
makes me sick, for a girl like you too!--and being mixed up with those
two fellows downstairs. By the way, the lame one sings too: something
about his 'Bonnie,' confound him! Well, since you're set on sticking
to business, and since you won't do what I ask, I want to help you to
be more comfortable and more successful. So I've been nosing about
and I've found you some really good premises in a central part, far
removed from this back-alley and those musical shopkeepers downstairs."

"What ever do you mean?" Ben demanded, her colour rising dangerously.

"Just what I have said," Tommy replied. "I have found you some really
good premises. In Dover Street. Close to the big hotels, close to
Piccadilly, and approached from the street direct by a staircase. Very
important, that."

"My dear boy, no doubt you meant it very well," said Ben, with some
temper, "but I can't have my affairs interfered with like this. I have
a lease here, for one thing; for another, it has become well known.
For another, I don't want to move. Dover Street, no doubt, is a good
position; but I can't afford Dover Street. This is cheap and central
enough. I hope you haven't committed yourself at all."

"I've got an option," said Tommy.

"Then please oblige me by instantly getting rid of it," said Ben.

"As to the higher rent," said Tommy, "you'd make that up in a jiffy
when people found you had a separate entrance and didn't have to go
through a shop."

"Please get rid of it instantly," said Ben. "I shan't have a moment's
peace of mind till you do. I'll come down with you," she said, with a
sudden foreboding of an explosion below.

"Oh, Ben," said Tommy, miserably, "and I did want to help you! All
right," he added angrily, "I'll go. And I may as well say good-bye now
instead of next week. Good-bye."

"But I'm coming down with you all the same," said Ben.




XXVII


"Is that Ben?" Toby asked over the telephone at Aubrey Walk, one
evening.

"Speaking," said Ben.

"I must see you," said Toby. "At once."

"But I was just going out," said Ben. "Where are you?"

"I'm at home," said Toby. "I'll come and go with you to wherever you're
going. It's frightfully important. It's a matter of life and death."

Ben smiled. She had been expecting this.

"I was only going to Uncle Paul's," she said. "I'll wait for you."

"Righto!" said Toby. "I'll come in a taxi."

He came, looking wild and haggard.

"This is awful," he said. "Vi says she won't wear my ring for six
months. And she wants me not to see her."

"For how long?" Ben asked.

"Six months: an eternity. How can I keep away from her for six months?
It's too dreadful! If I had any poison I'd take it; but I haven't. And
chemists are so jolly careful since those Welsh cases."

"Six months isn't very long," said Ben; "only twenty-six Sundays. You
can stand that. Didn't Viola say anything else? She is still fond of
you, isn't she?"

"She said so, but I don't understand. If you're fond of anyone you want
to be with them. At least, I do. I don't get this fondness that gives
you the boot. She said," he went on, "that to be engaged to me was
impossible until I had something to do. Her father would never allow
it. If I could find something to do, with prospects of an income within
six months, she would defy her father and marry me; but she couldn't as
it is. Why she doesn't defy him now, I can't see."

"Well," said Ben. "I suppose that a father, as a father, has some
rights--at least as long as his daughter is dependent on him."

"But Vi's earning her own living, isn't she?" Toby asked. "Don't you
pay her a salary?"

"Not just yet," said Ben. "But we won't go into that. The point is,
that she lives at home and Mr. Marquand is her father."

"I had a notion that all this father stuff was out of date," said Toby.
"It is, in the novels I've read."

"Only if the children choose to rebel," said Ben. "And neither Viola
nor you are going to. Besides, I think he's right. He's Viola's father;
he's brought her up. Why should he allow her to become engaged to the
first irresponsible young man who comes along?"

"Why do you call me irresponsible?" Toby asked.

"Well, aren't you? Where is your responsibility, anyway? You're only
twenty, to begin with. You've only just left Oxford. What do you know?"

"I know my way about," said Toby.

"So does Dolly, my office boy," said Ben, "who's only sixteen. Probably
much better than you, because he knows how many pennies there are in a
shilling, which you certainly don't. But what do you _know_? What have
you learnt?"

"I know a certain amount of Greek and Latin," said Toby.

"Yes, but how much? Not enough to be a schoolmaster?"

"No," said Toby.

"Do you know any French?"

"Enough to get through a French novel," said Toby.

"Yes, but not enough to explain anything to a custom house officer at
Calais?"

"No," said Toby. "Emphatically not."

"What else do you know?"

"I know how to order a dinner."

"That's better," said Ben. "That's the first useful thing you've
mentioned."

"And I know a lot of men," said Toby.

"That's good, too," said Ben.

"And I've been asked to play for Middlesex," said Toby. "And, by the
way, Vi adores cricket. It's quite the thing now for a man when he's
playing away from home to take his wife with him. Heaps of them do. Vi
knows quite a lot about the game. You'd be surprised."

"I should forget all that," said Ben. "You can't play for a county and
be worth five hundred a year in a short time. If you really want Vi
while you're both young, you must think about work, and nothing but
work. Do you want her as much as that? As much as to give up cricket?"

"Of course," said Toby. "Of course I do. I can't live without her."

"You mean," said Ben, "you dislike the thought of living without her;
but you'll find yourself doing so, all right. And how much does _she_
want you?"

"I don't know," said Toby. "I don't see why she should want me at all;
but she seems to. We seem to suit each other down to the ground."

"And you really and truly believe that you would like to become a
married man and have a small house and go home every evening to dinner
and play cricket only on Saturdays? You would look upon that as the
perfect life?"

"Absolutely," said Toby.

"Very well then," said Ben, "you must act accordingly. You must
remember those old fairy-tales we used to read, where the woodcutter's
son, or whoever it was, had to perform all kinds of difficult tasks
before he could win the princess. Your task is, as quickly as possible,
to go into some business and make yourself indispensable. So far as I
can see, all that Oxford has done for you, if you are to make money, is
to give you an agreeable accent and nice cool manners. I fancy it's the
times you've played truant in London or were at home in the vacations
that have really been most useful. You couldn't learn at Oxford to
order dinner."

"But what am I to do?" Toby asked. "That's the question. The governor
wants me to go into Uncle Arthur's office in the city. But what's the
good of that? He's got three partners as it is, all with sons. It would
be years before I got a footing there."

"No," said Ben. "I shouldn't vote for that. You'd simply loaf and
gamble. I'll talk to father about it."

"It's a pity you stopped me betting," said Toby. "If you hadn't, I
should be rich to-day. That priceless boy of yours gave me a tip for a
100 to 8 winner, but I didn't do it. He's a marvel. He knows the whole
thing--trainers, jockeys, pedigrees, courses--and he hears things too.
Your friend Harford follows his advice like a baby."

"You promised," said Ben.

"I know," said Toby, "and I'll stick to it; but I think it was a
mistake."

"No," said Ben, "it wasn't. But, anyway, we'll forget it and
concentrate on the future. I'll go and see father first. After all,
it's his job to see that you are started in something, and meanwhile
don't be depressed. You ought to be proud to be put on your mettle for
a girl like Vi. It makes a knight of you! You'll be happier now, won't
you?"

And Toby promised.




XXVIII


But Colonel Staveley once again avoided a responsibility, for chance
made me the solver of the problem.

The very next morning, as it happens, I had a letter from my old friend
Marrable Leigh.

Marrable Leigh was one of those men who move amiably and quietly about
on Tom Tiddler's ground picking up gold and silver. He was in no
business and he was in all. He was on a Board here and a Board there,
and he had a complimentary pass on every railway in the country: a
privilege that is extended only to those who can afford to pay for it.
To the rich shall be given, and Marrable Leigh was permitted as seldom
as possible to pay for anything. Even his wine merchant implored his
acceptance of a dozen, just to try, and theatrical managers were always
sending him boxes. But he deserved his good luck, for he was a benign
and philanthropic creature, and he had the softest white hair I ever
saw.

"I wonder," he wrote, "if you know of a nice young man who could
manage a county club. There's a very fine house and estate in Surrey
going for a song, and I think it would be fun to make a residential
place of it, with plenty of lawn-tennis courts and a golf links,
billiard-rooms, and so forth. A young athletic man with brains, and
plenty of friends, but not necessarily experience. The amateur is often
best for this kind of thing. My idea is perhaps to live there myself
and make a hobby of it as well as a home. You may come in on the ground
floor if you like."

Following the line of least resistance, I took this letter at once to
"The Beck and Call."

Ben read it and her excitement was intense. I never saw her look so
animated and indeed beautiful: her colour was brilliant.

"Oh, dear!" she said, with a sigh that was sheer relief and content,
"how amazing! And to come to-day too!"

She took the telephone and called for a number.

"Is that you, Price?" she asked. "Miss Ben speaking. Is Mr. Toby
down yet? He's having breakfast. Well, tell him to come instantly to
Motcombe Street. Very important. Call a taxi for him."

"Oh, dear, how happy I am!" she said. And then she told me about Toby
and his affairs.

"Of course Toby's exactly what is wanted," she said. "He has heaps of
friends at Oxford, and there are father's club friends, too. He's very
good at games. He's mad to throw himself into something and prove that
he isn't just a dud. And there's this love trouble to incite him to do
more than his best. Don't you agree?"

"Well," I said, "it wouldn't matter if I didn't. Having come here for
advice I shall take it. But, as it happens, I do agree. I think Toby
ought to be splendid, and it is like Marrable Leigh's instinct to
fasten on that type."

When Toby came in he took fire at once. "Of course I can do it," he
said. "I'm used to managing. Although no one knew it I deputized for
our bursar lots of times, behind the scenes. And I know of a ripping
butler out of a job at this moment, at the Carterets' at Hurley, you
know," he explained to his sister. "They're giving up their house. He's
a nailer!"

Ben looked proudly at me.

"And if the governor was allowed to take a few shares it would be all
to the good," Toby continued. "It would interest him in it."

Ben looked still more proud. "Not such a fool as you thought him, this
boy," her expression seemed to say. And how true it is that opportunity
so often makes the man!

"Couldn't we see Mr. Marrable Leigh now?" Toby asked.

"I think we might ring up," I said; and we did so and made an
appointment.

Let it suffice to say that we spent a most amusing day motoring to
Fairmile Towers, exploring the house and grounds, and motoring back.

That evening Toby dined with Marrable Leigh; and the next day Miss
Marquand was again--under the rose--wearing his ring.




XXIX


"Look here, Ben," said Colonel Staveley, "something awful's happened
and I want your help."

He was unusually smart in appearance, Ben noticed.

"Tell me quickly," she said.

"It's in this cable," said the Colonel. "Merrill's husband."

Ben read the message, which stated that the Rev. Egbert Bourne had died
of pneumonia in Minneapolis a day or so before.

"Merrill's got to be told," said the Colonel.

"Of course," said Ben. "You'll go down at once, won't you?" She reached
for the "A.B.C."

"Well, the fact is," said the Colonel, "I can't. Most unfortunate, but
I've got an old engagement for to-day and I can't get out of it. One
of those postponed things which it's idiotic to put off any more. For
three years now I've promised to go to Ascot and each time something
has occurred."

"But surely Belle wouldn't mind--considering everything," said Ben.

"Belle?" replied her father. "Oh, yes! But it isn't Belle. Belle
doesn't care about racing. It's Lady Dunster. I should take Belle too,
of course, if she wanted; feel it my duty to; but she doesn't care
about racing, and it would be too absurd to disappoint Lady Dunster
again. On such a fine day, too. And, after all, it isn't as if he died
here. All those thousands of miles away! So I thought you'd be the
good, kind girl you always are and just nip down to Astingham. I don't
think it will be so very painful. Merrill never seemed to me to care
much for him."

"I've got a taxi waiting," he went on, "so I'd better not stay any
more. Of all forms of wasting money, letting a taxi tick up while it's
standing still is the silliest."

And he was gone.

Ben's lips shaped themselves to whistle, but no sound came. "It's lucky
for us that mother had some nice feelings," she permitted herself to
think.

She called Jan.

"I've got to go down to the country," she said, "and I may stay the
night. Tell Miss Marquand to open everything and act as if she were me."

"No one could do that," said the loyal Jan.

"Well, as nearly as possible then," said Ben. "This is my address if
you want anything special," and she hurried off.

At the station she sent a telegram to Merrill to announce her
imminence, and then she settled down in the compartment to consider the
situation.

Poor old Egbert, she thought. What an arid life! To a large extent
wasted, with the kind of waste that is going on on all sides. What did
he marry for? He thought he was in love, or, at any rate, in need of
Merrill. But he wasn't. He no sooner acquired her than he forgot her;
she became furniture; all he wanted was himself and the opportunity
to get on with his foolish book, which didn't matter to anyone.
Everything was sacrificed to that; his blood turned to ink; he ceased
to be interested in actual present-day life; his sympathy changed to a
pedantic curiosity; he gave what was meant for his fellow-creatures to
a Biblical tribe that had been dead for thousands of years.

And how many other men were like him? They didn't all write about the
Hittites, but they had their absorbing Hittites all the same, whether
business Hittites or play Hittites, and so their altar promises became
scraps of paper and the precious hours slipped away. What a muddle!
What a muddle!

And Merrill? Fortunately she was of a more equable nature than so many
a neglected wife; fortunately she had no great depths, or, at any rate,
if she had, no man had discovered them. Egbert had been lucky in his
choice. Many another woman would have taken things into her own hands
and have secretly saved something from the wreck. But Merrill was too
light-hearted, too simple. And now perhaps she would marry again--she
was only a little over thirty--and be happy: marry a plus-four man,
with a taste for dancing and the theatre, who, if he ever thought of
the Hittites at all, thought of them as a Central African race who made
bearers for hunters of big game.

That was Merrill's right husband, and they would have a large house
in the country, and two or three children, and come to town for the
season, and if he did any work at all it would be purely as a J.P.

There was nothing to meet Ben at the station, and when she reached the
Vicarage the first thing she saw was her unopened telegram on the hall
table.

Mrs. Bourne was playing golf, said the maid.

Poor Merrill, what ought to be done? Ben wondered. Was it fair to spoil
her game? But, on the other hand, was it fair to let her go on and
give a chance to malicious tongues?

Ben decided to walk to the links, and no sooner did she get there
and observe Merrill and her partner than she realized that in all
probability the plus-four man had already arrived.

Merrill, under the solicitous tuition of this tall and very
good-looking country gentleman, was about to dig out the ball with a
heavy iron when she caught sight of her younger sister.

At first she could not believe it, and then, "Ben, you darling!" she
exclaimed, flung away the club and was in her arms.

"Whoever thought of seeing you here!" she went on. "But how splendid!
Let me introduce Captain Andrews."

After a few conventional words, the Captain, who had tact as well as
good looks, said that since Ben was there he would ask Mrs. Bourne to
release him from his engagement to lunch with her; nor would he take
any refusal.

For this Ben was very grateful to him, and it set him high in her
estimation.

"But I want you to know my sister," said Merrill.

"And I want to know her," he said; "but to-day, I am sure, you have
much to talk about. I'll order the car and drive you home."

It was while Merrill was in the club-house that Ben had an opportunity
of speaking to the Captain.

"That was very thoughtful of you," she said; and she told him the
nature of her errand.

"Good God!" he exclaimed, but in accents, she fancied, more of
surprise, or even relief, than of sorrow. "Good God! I think," he
added, after a moment, "I'll send my shover with you. Perhaps you will
be so kind as to make my apologies to your sister," and he walked away.

"Is Captain Andrews married?" Ben asked, as they whirled along.

"No," said Merrill.

"Does he live near here?"

"Yes," said Merrill. "Between Petersfield and Midhurst. He's got a
beautiful place. And now you darling," she said, "tell me truly why you
came down. Much as you love my _beaux yeux_ I know it wasn't for them."

"It was to fill them with tears," said Ben.

"What do you mean?" Merrill asked anxiously. "What has happened?"

"Egbert," said Ben.

"Egbert? Not dead?" said Merrill.

"Yes," said Ben. "In America, pneumonia."

"Merciful heavens!" Merrill exclaimed.

Grief and joy can inhabit amicably a very small house. But in
Merrill's case grief was rather more like pity, and joy a consciousness
of release. Only a dazed consciousness, though, at the moment.

"Poor Egbert, poor old Egbert," she murmured. "He didn't have much
fun." And then, "Poor Egbert, what a long way to go to die!"

She was silent for a long while.

"I suppose I ought to do things," she said.

"Of course," said Ben. "There is so much to do. You must write to his
relations. No one knows but you, I believe. You must write to the
Bishop about the living. You will have to get clothes."

"I suppose so," said Merrill. "Yes, of course, clothes."

"And you ought to cable to America."

"What about?" Merrill asked.

"Well, what do you want done with--with Egbert? Sometimes they
embalm----"

"Oh, no, he must be buried there," said Merrill. "Not here. Dying so
far away, he must be buried far away. He had no real interest in this
place. Some day, perhaps, I might go over there and see his grave.
Where was it?"

"Minneapolis," said Ben.

"Yes, he was to lecture there," said Merrill.

"Some day--oh," she exclaimed, "I must let Captain Andrews know!"

"He does know," said Ben. "I told him."

Merrill looked at her. "That's why he sent the chauffeur," she said. "I
see." Her perplexity gave way for a moment to a smile.




XXX


"Say," said the American, addressing Mr. Jack Harford, and stooping
to pat that casual tradesman's inseparable companion, "is this a dog
fancier's or a book store?"

"We sell books and water-colours," said Jack; "or, at least, we keep a
stock of books. But this spaniel belongs to me and is not for sale."

"I'm sorry," said the American. "I was looking for a flea-trap. But
what about this 'Beck and Call' sign. How can I get there? I've got
some questions to ask. Is it a good place?"

"Very," said Jack. "The office is run by a Miss Staveley, and she seems
to give satisfaction. But it depends rather on what you want. Through
the shop and up the stairs."

"I'll try," said the American. "These chancey things often pan out
best."

He ascended the stairs, and after Jan had, in Dolly's phrase, passed
the rule over him, he was admitted to Ben.

"My name's Barclay Corbet," he began. "I see you solve Domestic
Problems, so perhaps you can solve mine. This is what I'm becking
and calling about: I want to spend a few weeks in real England. Not
the England that most of my countrymen are shown, but something that
you'd call essentially 'old world.' Don't mention a cathedral," he
added hastily; "I've had all the cathedrals I want and all the vergers.
Don't mention a watering place, or the Dukeries, or anything like
that. Don't mention Oxford or Cambridge. And above all don't mention
Stratford-on-Avon. I want retirement. What I want is a place where
there's no railway within miles, no corrugated iron roofs, no waiters
in clawhammer coats, but pretty waiting-maids named Kate and Lucy
instead, and no boys calling winners. And I want there to be a saddler
in it making saddles in the midst of the smell of leather, and a
churchyard with the graves all crooked and all over moss. And spaniels;
yes, there must be spaniels. And another thing, a rookery. Can you do
this?"

Ben furrowed her forehead.

"I wonder," she said, "if Shaftesbury would do? It's in Dorset; very
old, very quiet and self-contained, and high up on a hill like an
Italian town, like Siena."

"That settles it," said Mr. Corbet. "If it's high on a hill, it's
no good to me. I've had all the climbing I want. And if it's like
anything Italian, it can fade away into the back seats. I've done with
macaroni. No," he went on, "think again. Think of something where
there's a river to loaf beside and a water mill."

"A water mill! Oh, I know," exclaimed Ben--"Bibury!"

"You seem mighty struck on places ending in 'bury'," said her client.

"It was you who insisted on a churchyard," Ben retaliated.

"So it was," said the American, "but for æsthetic purposes only. Still,
tell me about this Bibury."

"Bibury is a dream," said Ben. "It's all grey stone, and every house
looks as if it grew there. But they're beautiful too, and even the
tiniest cottages have mullioned windows and delicious gables. The barns
are like cathedrals--without," she added hastily, "any vergers--and the
cattle-sheds are like cloisters. It's in Gloucestershire. It's miles
from a station, and there's a trout stream, and--if you value that, but
of course you don't--the people still touch their caps and the little
girls curtsy. And when I was there last there certainly weren't any
waiters--only nice girls, even if they weren't named Kate and Lucy. But
their caps were white. And there are millions of rooks, and if you
were very lucky you might see a kingfisher."

"It's too good to be true," said the American. "Show it me in the
'A.B.C.'"

"I can't," said Ben. "It isn't there. You have to go to Cirencester."

"Better and better," said the American. "Places not in the 'A.B.C.'
have a special appeal for me. And bury or no bury, I'll go there. Is
the food good?"

"Didn't I say it was a fishing inn?" Ben replied.

"Well, young lady," said the American, "you've put me wise to what
sounds like a very good thing. Tell me how I pay you."

"I don't think you do," said Ben. "Not this time. You must come again
and let me do something more practical for you."

"It's a bet," said the American. "I'm very much obliged to you, young
lady. You're the brightest thing I've struck in this country yet. _Au
revoir!_ We shall meet again."

On his way through "The Booklovers' Rest" he paused to ask Jack if he
knew a place called Bibury.

"Know it?" said Jack. "I should think I do. It's one of the most
beautiful spots in England."

"Bully," said the American; but he had sufficient native scepticism to
ask if the bright girl upstairs did not have an interest in the inn.

"Because she's been recommending it?" Jack asked.

"I just wondered," said the American. "No offence," he added quickly,
as Jack's face darkened.

"It's just as well you said that," Jack replied, "or by jingo----" His
fists relaxed.

"Now look here, young man," said the American, "forgive me. I meant no
harm. And I like you for your feelings. I'll insure my life and come
here again."

A few weeks or so later Mr. Barclay Corbet, who was as good as his
word, was again announced by Jan.

"Miss Beck," he said, greeting Ben, "I've come to thank you for your
advice about an English village and to ask you to help me some more.
But this time it's a real business proposition. I've bought Bibury
Grange and I want you to furnish it for me as a place should be
furnished and find me some good servants. Will you?"

Ben collected her startled wits. "Of course," she said. "When do you
want to go in?"

"In three weeks to the minute," said Mr. Corbet, looking at his watch.

"Three weeks!" Ben gasped.

"Yes. I can't wait any longer. I'm going over to New York for a day or
two to settle some affairs, and I want when I return in exactly three
weeks to find the house ready for me to live in. I want to go straight
there and settle down and be happy. Will you do it?"

"But----" Ben was beginning.

"No 'buts,' Miss Beck," said the American. "Here's a plan of the house,
every room measured up. Take it and get busy. And here's a cheque that
will more than cover everything, and the bank is ready to let you have
more on your signature, if you'll kindly write one out for me for
reference. I haven't a minute now. The signature, please."

He rose.

"But I don't know your taste," said Ben.

"It's yours," said the American; "or rather, I should like it to be."

"Do you want a butler and a footman or only women?" Ben called after
him.

"Nice women, named Kate and Lucy and Alice and things like that," he
replied, as he left the room.

"And what about wall-paper?" she remembered to ask at the top of her
voice.

"White distemper," he called back, and was gone.




XXXI


With plenty of money one can acquire most of the less important things
of life; and Ben was not stinted there. So we had three terrific weeks.
I say "we" because I was in it.

We went to Bibury that evening, with an expert from one of the big
furnishers, and early the next morning we were busy starting the work.
Then we hurried back, with a full plan of house and garden, and began
to compile catalogues of necessities. There are printed lists to be had
from the big furnishers, and to these we added every kind of minute
accessory. Ben wanted to leave no loophole for criticism whatever. Ten
times in a night I would wake up and think of something that might be
forgotten and jot it down; and if I woke up ten times, Ben probably
woke up twenty, for this commission was her great chance.

I thought in this way of:


     Nut-crackers
     Goloshes
     Pepper mill
     Pond's Extract
     Court Plaster
     Order for newspapers
     Garden seats
     Fishing tackle
     Cigars and cigarettes
     Lavender sachets
     Paper clips
     Notepaper die.


Ben was taking Mr. Barclay Corbet at his word and making her own taste
control the whole scheme. This meant grey carpets and rose curtains,
all of which had to be put in hand instantly. Then there were rush
mattings and linos and rugs and blinds. Everything was new: there was
no time to hunt for the old; but it was the best new, and we saw that
every drawer opened easily. Fortunately two of the essentials of an
American's house that take most time to supply--central heating and the
telephone--were there already.

When it came to decorative inessentials we were cautious. Pictures,
for example. It is very difficult to buy pictures for other people, as
every one who has ever been in a hotel sitting-room will agree. Yet
there were those great bare, white distempered walls.

The pictures being an acute problem, Ben, with deep cunning, left them
to me.

"But I haven't seen your Barclay Corbet," I said. "A man can be
anything in the world until you've seen him. How can I choose? Does he
look like a hunting man?"

"No."

"That shuts out sets of coloured Alkens, which might be just the thing
for such a place: Alken, Sartorius, Ben Marshall, all those fine old
horsy fellows. Does he suggest exotic tastes?" I asked.

"No."

"That's puts a stopper on Japanese prints--as a rule such a safe line!
And oil paintings would cost too much. And mezzotints of beautiful
women, after Reynolds and Gainsborough, also dear, might not please
him."

It was then that Mr. Harford came to the rescue. "If he likes Bibury so
much," he said, "it follows that he must like Old England. I'll frame
up a lot of our water-colours--De Wint, Birket Foster, William Callow,
Tom Collier, David Cox, Varley--and if he likes them he can keep them,
and if not I'll take them back. And now I come to think of it, he
wanted to buy my dog, the swine! Called him a flea-trap! I've got some
engravings of spaniels and setters after Stubbs--I'll hang those in the
hall."

We settled the books in the same way. A certain number were decided
upon without any question, such as the "Encyclopædia Britannica,"
Dickens and Thackeray, and then a mixed collection was put together by
Mr. St. Quentin: to be retained or returned. All were supplied by that
enterprising firm "The Booklovers' Rest" on the principle, as Ben said,
of keeping Mr. Corbet in the family.

The few vases and bowls that were necessary were simpler: there are so
many non-committal shapes and colours now.

Mr. Harford did not confine himself to supplying the pictures and
books, but himself superintended their arrangement in the house,
and when I went down to Bibury for a last look round two or three
days before the time limit was up, in order to have the chance of
supplying any last-minute deficiencies that might occur to any of us,
I found that pleasant young gentleman among the people staying at the
inn. Although a second-hand book seller, he seemed to have views on
everything else too, together with a knack of getting things done,
while in addition he found time to throw a fly now and then over the
rapid waters of the Coln.

"Mr. Harford has been very kind," Ben said. "I'm sure he's needed in
London, for Mr. St. Quentin has sent him several telegrams; but he
wouldn't go back so long as there was any bother here."

We went over the house together, and it was undoubtedly an achievement.
Between us we had, I believe, covered the ground; Mr. Harford, with
diabolical thoroughness and perhaps a touch of malice, having actually
provided the library with a cuspidor.

The time being ripe, Ben and I returned to London--Mr. Harford, having
given in to his partner's S.O.S.'s the day before--for Ben preferred
not to be present when her client arrived. She argued that a house may
be described as more ready to live in if there is no one to welcome you
but your own people. But she left a little note expressing her hope
that she had succeeded in her task, and adding, "There is a corkscrew
in every room."




XXXII


It was, I imagine, the presence of the cuspidor which tickled Mr.
Barclay Corbet's fancy and provoked him to the series of telegrams
which he despatched to Ben. They came at intervals for a day or so. I
can remember a few, with the replies:


     Corbet Bibury to Beckancal London:
       Please explain curious article by library fire-place.

     Beckancal London to Corbet Bibury:
       Sorry if I have been over-zealous.

                  ----

     Corbet Bibury to Beckancal London:
       Do not seem to have any bellows.

     Beckancal London to Corbet Bibury:
       Look in oak chest in hall.

                  ----

     Corbet Bibury to Beckancal London:
       Gardener clamouring for secateur.

     Beckancal London to Corbet Bibury:
       In cupboard in summer-house.

                  ----

     Corbet Bibury to Beckancal London:
       Cannot find any shaving paper.

     Beckancal London to Corbet Bibury:
       Tear up "Times."


And then came Mr. Barclay Corbet in person to express his absolute
satisfaction and to make Ben and her staff a handsome present, and then
to spend some hours downstairs in fixing up his shelves properly.

"Whoever thought I wanted an 'Encyclopædia Britannica,'" he said, "is
the world's worst clairvoyant. What I want is the works of A. Trollope.
They're good to read and they're good to send you to sleep."




XXXIII


Alicia, better dressed than usual, with a new vanity bag and a rather
dashing hat, had been seated in Ben's room for many minutes before she
could bring herself to be explicit and admit that she had received
an offer of marriage. From a widower, a retired ironmaster, living
at Hove. In one of the avenues, she added; with his sister: a horrid
woman. They had met at a séance, for he, too, was interested in
spiritualism and was in communication with his late wife. At least he
had tried to be, but that lady had refused to be communicative because,
she said, there was someone antipathetic to her in the room.

"You, I suppose," said Ben, in her blunt way.

"I don't know why you should say so," said Alicia, hurt.

"I don't see why she should rejoice in your presence, anyway," Ben
replied. "It can't be much fun for dead wives, out of it for ever,
watching their husbands preparing for a second marriage."

"That's just it," said Alicia, with a groan.

"What do you mean?" Ben asked.

"Nothing," said Alicia, and was silent for quite a long while.

"Do you want to marry him?" Ben asked.

"I don't dislike him," said Alicia, "but it is very sudden. I had never
expected anything of the kind to happen, or indeed thought about it. As
you know, I was anticipating a lonely life dedicated to the boys. And
if it weren't for the boys I shouldn't consider it now, for an instant.
But of course it would be good for them. He is so fond of them, and a
man is a better influence than a weak, fond mother."

"So you will say yes?" said Ben.

"I don't know, oh, I don't know," said Alicia, dismally, with a glance
at her pocket mirror. "You see," she added, "there's Bertrand. He ought
to be told."

"I thought you said that he knew everything about you," said Ben.

"So I have thought," said Alicia. "But he ought to be told formally.
And that can be done only through the medium, and I don't want her to
know. I've never liked her, apart from her calling. Not a lady, by a
long way. Not even the third drawer! But if Bertrand knew, wouldn't he
have let me know? Some little message of encouragement? Surely! But no,
nothing. I used to feel so certain of him, but now it's all changed.
Do you think I'm becoming less psychic or that he's cross?"

"I hope you're becoming less psychic," said Ben. "You oughtn't to marry
retired iron-masters and be psychic too. Bertrand was a very just man,"
she continued. "He couldn't be so unreasonable as to wish you to be
deprived of the company and consolation of a second husband."

"I'm not sure," said Alicia. "I feel that he counts on me, and I may
lose him if I marry again."

"I suppose, to a certain extent, you would," said Ben.

"You think so?" Alicia asked eagerly.

"Yes, I think you would," said Ben. "It's only natural. And I think if
you married you would want to, too."

"Want to lose Bertrand?" Alicia asked in amazement.

"Yes. It would be very awkward to have both."

"I suppose it would," Alicia admitted.

"And besides," said Ben, "after all, you may have been mistaken
about conversing with Bertrand at all. The whole thing may be an
hallucination, proceeding from yourself. The wish the father to the
thought, you know."

"Do you think so?" Alicia asked with some excitement. "Do you think I
have imagined it all and Bertrand and I have had no communication?"

"I think it quite possible," said Ben. "You'll never be able to prove
it, of course. Anyway, from what I remember of Bertrand, he would want
you to be happy, and he would like his boys to be looked after."

"You think he would?" Alicia asked.

"I'm certain of it," said Ben.

"Then you would marry Mr. Redforth?"

"If I liked him sufficiently, and trusted him, yes," said Ben. "In any
case I should not let the vague possibility of Bertrand's disapproval
deprive me of the chance of new happiness."

"Ben, you're a darling!" said Alicia, kissing her impulsively. "I'll do
it."

"And what about Mr. Redforth's sister?" Ben asked.

"Oh, she must make her own arrangements," said Alicia.




XXXIV


Walking in Kensington Gardens to-day whom should I meet but Ben's Uncle
Paul, with his latest yacht on his arm; and he seemed almost to welcome
the opportunity of sitting down for a while to chat. For we are not the
most intimate of acquaintances; not because of any inherent antipathy,
but because of an acute observer would probably detect in each of us
a slight suspicion of the other--a tincture of jealousy--each of us
wishing to be the nearest and dearest among Ben's middle-aged friends.
Her capture of a young man we should accept not with joy but with
resignation--for it would be according to nature--but we should hate to
see her adding another friend of fifty to her retinue.

We began, as we usually do when we meet, by mentioning her. It is a
sign that true intimacy is lacking when a third person is called in as
an ice-pick. And how often it happens!

"Have you seen Ben lately?" I asked, hoping fervently that the
advantage was with me.

"She came in to see me last evening," said Uncle Paul, with all his
usual difficulty of utterance, and my heart fell. (But of course
relatives don't count. Relatives are in the line of least resistance.
The real test is when a stranger is made a friend of.)

"How do you feel about the business?" Uncle Paul asked. "Do you think
it is really thriving? Do you think it is too great a strain?"

"I don't think so," I said. "And she does it so well; she's so happy
doing it that a little strain wouldn't matter."

"I went into the book shop underneath the other day," said Uncle Paul,
"all unbeknown to Ben, to have a look at those young men. I suppose
you've seen them?"

I had seen them often, confound them! "Yes," I said, "once or twice."

"And how do they strike you?" Uncle Paul inquired. "Because you know, I
suppose----" He stopped for a while. "Well, I wonder what you think of
them," he said.

"I am sorry to say," I replied, "that I don't see anything very wrong
with either."

He looked at me through his highly magnifying gold-rimmed glasses. Then
he laughed.

"I felt a little like that myself," he said. "But we mustn't be dogs in
the manger: old men like us."

(Not so old as that, all the same! He must speak for himself.)

"I could wish that the quiet one had more legs," said Uncle Paul. "But
I suppose that his disability is all in his favour with such a born
manager as Ben. Would he be your choice?"

"I don't know," I said. "I sometimes think I should prefer her to take
the jolly one. And I like a man to be complete."

"The jolly one might get on her nerves after a while," said Uncle Paul.
"High spirits and facetiousness can ruin a marriage almost as easily as
egotism and irony."

"I don't think Harford's humour is as virulent as that," I said. "I
saw a lot of him at Bibury. I thought his gaiety rather attractive. He
has some brains, too. His principal fault--and I wish I could share
it--is that he finds life an adventure and a joke. But he will be cured
of such heresies as those all too soon. Nothing so enrages the Powers
above as to see anyone down here daring to be like that. And they have
all the weapons of chastisement and correction so handy!"

"Well, I shall put my money on the lame one," said Uncle Paul.

"But why should she marry either?" I asked. "She does not strike me as
so inevitably a marrying girl."

"Geographical conditions largely," said Uncle Paul. "There they all
are, so absolutely on the spot."

"I should have thought they would be jealous," I said.

"I've no doubt they are," said Uncle Paul, who seemed to me to know far
too much for a stammering recluse given to Round Pond navigation. "And
if one of them is not accepted, or both aren't refused, pretty soon,
'The Booklovers' Rest' will dissolve partnership."

"As bad as that?" I remarked.

"I think so," he said. "It's astonishing what a disturbing element in
the lives of two young men one young woman can be."

"Yes," I said, "and it's more astonishing when it's such a sensible
girl as Ben, who would not be bothered to make mischief with anyone,
but merely wants to go her own way and be busy. But what does Nature
care about 'The Becks and Calls'? Nature has only two ideas in her
obstinate old head. One is that people should fall in love and become
parents, and the other that they should grow old."




XXXV


"You may think us very foolish," said the tall man, as he seated
himself.

"Or very greedy," said his wife.

"But we want some advice about food, and seeing your signboard, which
reminded me of the inn my father used to keep in Helmsley," the man
continued, "we thought we'd come in and ask. But," he said, "I never
thought to find a beautiful young lady like you, miss. You are 'miss,'
I take it?"

"Yes," said Ben, laughing.

"Somehow," said the tall man, "our difficulty is more one to put to
an older woman. But it's like this. My wife and I are just back from
New Zealand, where we've lived ever since I was twenty. I've done very
well, and we're having a look round London. We're staying at the Hotel
Splendid, you know. Everything bang up. Private suite. Gold clock under
a glass shade."

"Which doesn't go," said his wife.

"Steam heat," he continued, "that dries up all my tobacco. Everything
perfect, in fact. But we can't get the food we like. You see, miss,
we're very simple folk, and we want the old-fashioned things. All the
way home we have been thinking and talking about the things we would
eat, and now that we're here we can't get them. They serve them, but
they're not right. Sausages and mashed--I know just how they ought to
taste; but at the 'Splendid' they taste of nothing. And lots of things
I used to be so fond of at home they don't serve at all. I can't get a
pork-pie--'porch-peen,' as we used to call it. When I asked the head
waiter for cow's heel, I thought he'd throw a fit. Batter pudding,
boiled onions, apple dumplings; it's no good, they can't make them to
taste of anything, or they can't make them at all. They've got such
a horror of the flavour of apple that they smother it with lemon and
cloves. Now, miss, couldn't you tell us of some smaller places--we
don't mind how small or how common--where we could get some of the old
homely stuff? My poor wife here is wasting away."

"Oh, John, it's you that want them much more than I do," said his wife.

"I don't know much about food myself," said Ben, "but I've heard my
father say that there are certain things that no restaurant can ever
do as well as home cooks. He says that no restaurant can make bread
sauce or horse-radish sauce properly. No restaurant can be trusted
with mushrooms. My advice to you," she continued, "would be to cut
out London altogether, unless you were set on it, and go either to a
country inn or to a farm, where the milk isn't watered and the cream
hasn't any boric acid, and the eggs are this morning's, and things
taste as they should. London never gets anything really fresh. Why
don't you go to your own Yorkshire?" she asked.

"We shall later," said the tall man. "But we want to see London first;
and meanwhile we're starving."

"Then you must go into lodgings," said Ben, "where there is a good
plain cook."

"John is so fond of the 'Splendid,'" said his wife. "He's always wanted
to stay in that kind of hotel and waste his money on red carpets and
sit in lounges and watch the actresses."

"Then stay at the 'Splendid,'" said Ben, "but eat at simpler places. It
would be amusing to pay five pounds for a bed and five shillings for
meals. The management ought to know about it--it might do them good.
But wait a minute," she went on, "I've just thought of something."

She rang the bell and Dolly entered.

"We want your advice," she said. "Do you know of any eating-houses
where old-fashioned food is well cooked and tastes like itself?"

"Plenty, miss," said Dolly. "There's a place in the Hampstead Road with
a placard up that says 'Everything as Nice as Mother Makes It.'"

The New Zealander slapped his thigh. "Now you're talking!" he cried.
"Does it really say that? That's what we're looking for: 'Everything
as Nice as Mother Makes It'--my! but that's a great sentence; that's
literature. Where is this place, boy?"

"In the Hampstead Road," said Dolly. "But there are others too, very
likely. And I can tell them about sausages, too, miss, and tripe and
onions. Famous places. And stewed eels, miss."

Ben shuddered.

"This is great!" said her client. "Now, look here, miss," he continued,
"this seems to me to be a bright boy. Let us have him for a few days
to show us round, and name your own price. He'll take us to the places
we want to see, like the Tower and the Zoo and Westminster Abbey, and
he'll show us where to eat."

"What do you say, Dolly?" Ben asked.

Dolly was obviously flattered; but he had the business at heart.

"I was wondering if I could be spared," he replied.

"Well, if you can be, what do you think your time is worth?" Ben
inquired.

"Including fares," he said, after some thought, "and taking into
consideration the distress and upheaval caused here by my absence,
fifteen bob a day, exclusive of lunch."

"We'll pay that," said the New Zealander, cheerfully, and the bargain
was struck. Dolly had become, for a week, a courier.

Later that same afternoon, Ben told me--it was one of her mixed-grill
days, as she called them, when every one was odd--a plainly dressed
young woman asked to see Miss Staveley on very pressing private
business, and was admitted.

"You won't know me, miss," she said, "but my mother was your Jane."

"Jane?" replied Ben. "You don't mean Jane Bunce?"

"Yes," said the girl. "The one who was with the Colonel and his lady
for so long and only left to be married."

"Of course," said Ben. "We are all very fond of her. I can remember her
perfectly, although I was so small. I hope she is all right."

"Yes," said the girl. "But father----"

"Tell me," said Ben.

"It's like this," said the girl. "Father's been ill now for months and
months, and somehow mother heard about you setting up here as a kind of
advice-giver. And she said 'You go along to Miss Ben's and ask her. I'm
sure she wouldn't object, for old sake's sake.'"

"Tell me," said Ben again.

"It's like this," the girl resumed. "Father's been ill for months and
months, and you know what sick folks are, how they get their minds
set on things? Well, he sits in a chair at the window watching the
motor-cars go by. We're in Peckham, you know, and motor-cars go by all
the time, and even more on Sundays, and--well, miss--he's never been in
one in his life. In motor-buses, yes, but never in a car. Motor-buses
don't count. They've got solid tyres; they're public. But a shiny
private car with rubber tyres, all his own for the time being--he's
never been in one of those; and he sits there at the window and it's
his only wish. But you see, miss, he can't ever do it now, because he's
that weak, and the doctor only gives him another two or three days."

"Well?" said Ben.

"Well," the girl went on, dabbing her eyes, "well, mother told me to
come and ask you if you think it would be very wrong--too extravagant,
I mean--if we were to give him a motor funeral? As a surprise, miss,
of course? What do you think, miss? What may I tell mother?"

"Give her my love," said Ben, "and tell her most certainly to do it.
And tell her to come and see me when the funeral's over."




XXXVI


"May I come in?" asked the bronzed, soldierly-looking man, as he opened
the door of Ben's room, having brought his handsome face and easy charm
to break down, with their usual success, Jan's opposition.

"My dear Cecil!" Ben exclaimed, rushing into her brother's arms, "what
brings you here? I thought you were in Paris."

"So we were," he said, "but I had to leave in self-defence. Yvonne was
ruining me. We were to have stayed there a month, but I should never
have got away at all if I hadn't put out all my strength and insisted
on coming now.

"The clothes that child buys!" he continued. "We're heading straight
for Queer Street. I see that you solve domestic problems; well, if
anyone ever asks you for advice as to marrying a foreigner, tell them
not to. The answer is in the negative. Foreigners are all right in
their place, but don't marry them."

"Poor Cecil!" said Ben.

"No, it isn't as bad as that," he said. "Yvonne and I get on very
well. But she's a foreigner, and once a foreigner, always a foreigner.
They never get to understand. I can't make her realize that I'm not
rich. She thinks that all Englishmen must be rich. She has plenty of
relations in the French Army--naturally--and they are poor enough, but
an English officer must necessarily be wealthy. Nothing that I can
say or do has any effect. I show her my accounts; but I might just as
well be exhibiting a bridge score. She has no idea of money or figures
whatever. And if by any chance a glimmering that I may be telling the
truth enters her brain, she says 'Ah, but your father is rich. Some
day he will die--he is an old man--and then you will be rich too.'
They're so practical, the French. They go straight for what they want,
and what she wants is her father-in-law's death. But, as a matter of
fact, as I have told her, judging by the governor's general appearance
to-day, he is far less likely to peg out than I am. He's as skittish as
a two-year-old on stepmother's money; and he and Yvonne are as thick as
thieves. They're at some function or other together to-day--Ranelagh, I
believe. Thank God you can't buy clothes at Ranelagh!"

"No," said Ben, "but you can see them and get envious and plot
terrific campaigns for to-morrow."

Cecil groaned.

"As a matter of fact," he said, "I don't see what I've gained by
bringing her to London. There's a Rue de la Paix here too! The old joke
had it that first you paid and then you rued, but I don't see how I can
pay. It's her only fault, but it's deadly. I can't put a notice in the
papers disowning her bills, because I'm not that sort, but it's getting
very serious, and if something doesn't happen or someone doesn't leave
me a fortune, I shall be up against it. When you see her, Ben, do try
and make her understand."

"Of course I'll try," said Ben. "What a pity you haven't any children!
If she had something like that to occupy her, she'd forget about dress."

"Not Yvonne!" said Cecil. "If Yvonne had been the old woman who lived
in a shoe, she'd have had a different dress to do every whipping in."

"Doesn't she read?" Ben asked.

"She lies on the sofa with a book," said Cecil, "but she's not a
reader. She's at heart a _mannequin_; but she's a darling too," he
added hastily. "Don't think I'm not in love with her still. I am. I
adore her. But heavens! she's extravagant: I've had to give up polo
entirely because of it. She doesn't know it, but I have. I pretended
I'd strained my back."

That evening Ben and Yvonne met at Colonel Staveley's.

"But, my dear Ben," said Yvonne, in her pretty broken English, "you
would not 'ave me shabbee?"

"That would be impossible," said Ben. "But poor old Cecil isn't rich,
you know."

"Ah!" said Yvonne, giving Ben a pat with delicate ringed hands, "'e
'ave spoke with you about me. And you say 'I will defend my big brozzer
against this--this--so naughty butterfly?' Is it not so?"

"Cecil adores you," said Ben. "I wish you had some children."

Yvonne's large brown eyes filled with tears.

"And I," she said. "Always I think of it. But _le bon Dieu_, 'E say no."




XXXVII


Not long after the close of the Barclay Corbet episode Mr. Harford
waylaid Ben as she passed through the shop.

"I was wondering," he said, "if you would break a chop with Soul and me
this evening? Anywhere you like?"

Ben agreed.

"You shall not be restricted to a chop," said Jack. "Order anything in
season or out of it. I'm rich to-day. I sold a lot of things to another
Yank. They're the book seller's friends! Pat's at Leamington at a book
sale--and I flatter myself he'll be surprised when he comes back."

"There are two ways of being surprised," said Ben, remembering the
incident of the imperfect copy.

"That's a very nasty one," said Mr. Harford. "I credited you with a
shorter memory. But the insult shall be washed out in red wine, or
even, if you say the word, in the yellow and effervescing juices of
Epernay or Rheims. Money is no object. Consider me this evening as a
Quaritch, or even a Rosenbach."

"As a matter of fact," said Ben, "I am in need of a particularly good
dinner, for I have had a trying day. More than one thing has happened
to tire me, and my last client--or would-be client--did more than tire,
she humiliated me."

"'How come?'" asked Jack, who had added that detestable transatlantic
locution to his vocabulary, chiefly with the meritorious if frivolous
purpose of exasperating his partner.

"A very offensive woman called half an hour ago in a motor-car many
yards long--you may have noticed her--to ask me to make arrangements to
take her little Peter out for a walk three times every day while she is
away in Paris," said Ben. "I was very angry and refused."

"Is Peter her little boy?" Jack asked.

"Little boy!" said Ben. "Nothing so unimportant. It's her Pekinese.
When I refused she was furious. She almost accused me of being an
impostor. She said that my business was to solve domestic problems and
that no domestic problem was so acute as the exercising of dogs."

"I wish I'd known," said Mr. Harford. "I saw her go out. If I'd known,
I should have offered her some suitable books: 'Self Help' by Smiles,
or 'It's Never Too Late to Mend,' The--the----"

"Hush!" said Ben. "People who hang out signs can't be choosers."

"Now that we are firmly entrenched in this corner," said Mr. Harford,
after they had finished their soup, "I've got a proposition to lay
before you. I was useful at Bibury, wasn't I?"

"Very," said Ben.

"I helped in bucking the men up and getting things done?"

"Very," said Ben.

"And you don't dislike me?"

"Not particularly," said Ben.

"Well," said Mr. Harford, "what I was thinking is that you and I might
do very well in partnership."

Ben flushed.

"No," he said quickly. "I don't mean what you think I mean--at any rate
not at the moment. But you're not engaged, are you?"

"No," said Ben.

"Thank Heaven!" said Mr. Harford fervently. "But look here, Miss
Staveley, I swear I didn't ask you here to ask you that. It was sprung
on me. I swear I didn't. You believe me, won't you?"

Ben expressed her belief.

"When I said 'partnership,'" he resumed, "I meant business partnership,
although---- When I said partnership I meant business partnership.
Because it seems to me that you and I could do a lot of things together
very profitably. You could get this kind of commission again--old
Corbet is probably singing your praises all over the place to other
impulsive and rich Americans, and that will mean business--and I could
act as your overseer."

"But what about 'The Booklovers' Rest'?" Ben asked.

"Well, Pat would run that; or, if need be, I'd retire. You know, Miss
Staveley, speaking in strict confidence, I don't believe I'm a born
book seller. Honest, I don't."

Ben laughed. "What a wonderful discovery to have made!" she said.

"But," he went on, quite gravely, "I do believe I have a _flair_ for
getting the best out of people under me."

"There won't always be a trout stream," said Ben.

"Now you're making fun of me," he said. "I'm really serious. I feel all
tied up and congested in that shop among mouldy books. It's all right
for Pat--he's a literary cove, and his one desire is to read books and
write them."

"Does he want to write?" Ben asked. "I didn't know that."

"Oh, yes," said Mr. Harford; "that's his one ambition. But he can't
afford to. He has to make a living. If he were rich he'd chuck book
selling to-morrow and take to authorship; and he'd be jolly good too.
I'd have my money in the business whatever happened. My mother is
always good for more. But what do you say?"

"Well," said Ben, "I can't say anything very definite. We must wait
till another Mr. Barclay Corbet comes along and then we might make
some arrangement; but I think to talk of--of partnership is rather
premature."

"But you don't hate me?" Mr. Harford asked anxiously.

"I said I didn't," Ben replied.

"I wish you could see my mother," he said. "She's splendid. But she
lives rather a long way off--at Laycock. I suppose you wouldn't come
down for a week-end? It is a delicious place, a little like Bibury, as
a matter of fact. All grey too. Would you?"

"I don't see how I could," said Ben.

"No," said Mr. Harford. "I was afraid not."

He left her at her door.

She gave him her hand.


     "Good evening, O'Reilly,
       You _are_ looking glum,"


she sang.

"No wonder," he said, and turned away.

Ben stood at the door long enough to see him stoop down and pat Soul's
head.




XXXVIII


On Ben's desk lay a long envelope addressed to Miss Staveley in an
unknown hand. Opening it she found the following fantasy:


     THE INTERVIEW

     I dreamed that I went to Heaven. I wasn't dead; I went there on a
     mission to interview God for a paper.

     "He will be quite easy," the editor assured me. "In fact, He will
     like it; it will be a new experience. Every one secretly likes
     being interviewed, no matter what they say to the contrary, and
     God will like it too. I'm told He's very human."

     This was an odd dream for me, because I've never been a
     journalist; but if dreams weren't odd we shouldn't remember them.

     I knocked at the door and St. Peter opened it: an old man like a
     Tintoretto portrait with a halo. It was the first real halo I had
     ever seen and I looked at it more than at its wearer. It had no
     visible fastening, but always remained in position, about three
     inches above the head, not exactly shining but luminous. At night
     they must be very effective--if there is any night in Heaven. I
     wish I had asked. I wish now that I had asked heaps of things I
     didn't ask. Next time I shall make a list; but then there will be
     no next time.

     Of course I don't mean that I should have troubled God about these
     trifles; I should have found one of the young angels who were
     everywhere and asked him; or I should have sent for one of my
     friends who died in the War....

     Should I? I wonder if I should have dared....

     Meanwhile St. Peter waits. "What do you want?" he asked.

     I handed him my card with the name of the paper on it.

     "God perhaps would grant me an interview?" I said. "I was sent
     here for the purpose."

     St. Peter looked more than surprised.

     "My editor," I said, "seemed confident that I should be admitted."

     "Who is your editor?" said St. Peter. "Do we know him here?"

     "I should doubt it," I replied.

     "Well, I'll see," he said, "but it's all very unusual and
     irregular. You'd better tell your leonid to wait."

     He carefully locked the door again, with me just inside it, and
     shuffled away. He was clearly irritated.

     After a while he returned.

     "It's very surprising," he said, "but God will see you. He seemed
     quite pleased about it. I don't know what Heaven's coming to.
     Personally, I'm against every kind of publicity. The emphasis
     laid by a fellow-disciple on one or two unfortunate moments in
     my own life has been a source of grief to me ever since. This
     way, please, and remember that the interview is permitted only
     on condition that no leading questions are asked. Nothing as to
     the reason for the creation or anything like that, for example. A
     quiet talk merely; no excitement."

     How I came into the Presence I cannot remember; but suddenly I was
     with God, just ourselves. Nor did I feel frightened.

     But St. Peter's warning about leading questions made it difficult
     for me. Of course those were what I wanted to ask, and I remember
     thinking how annoyed my editor would be that I had paid any
     attention to a doorkeeper. The whole business of interviewers is
     to be superior to doorkeepers. But then I am not a journalist; I
     have quite a lot of sensitiveness; and I could not bring myself
     to disregard the old saint, who, after all, was only acting on
     instructions. It would be terrible to be allowed into Heaven and
     then behave in a vulgar way.

     After racking my brains for a start I asked God if there was
     anything that was interesting Him in particular just at the moment.

     He smiled.

     "As it happens," He said, "there is. Only this morning I was
     looking down over London, and almost for the first time I noticed
     something that gave me great pleasure. Pathetic too, in a way; but
     then there is so much pathos----

     "I noticed all the little gardens. I don't mean the gardens where
     there are gardeners; I mean the tiny square yards among the stones
     and squalor, with flowers and shrubs that literally fight for life
     and would never live at all if they were not lovingly tended.
     Sometimes there is a rockery, sometimes an attempt at a pool, and
     then the window-boxes--they give Me pleasure too, much more than
     Corporation ornamental bedding ever could. Some of these little
     gardens," He said, "and the gallant struggle they make to bring
     beauty into ugly places, call tears to the eyes"; and I believe He
     meant it, for I watched Him. "The poor souls," He murmured, "the
     poor, brave souls."

     "You mentioned Corporation carpet-bedding just now, Sir," I
     said. "You must have noticed that English gardens are infinitely
     more reckless and joyful than they used to be? Of course, I don't
     know what flowers were like, Sir, when You began, but every year
     sees new varieties come into being--more lovely delphiniums,
     more ethereal columbines, more glorious tulips, more delicate
     daffodils, and every year more people lavish themselves on
     herbaceous borders and wild gardens."

     "I have certainly noticed it," said God, "and it has given Me
     immense satisfaction. I know who is chiefly responsible for it
     too," He added, "and her name is very highly honoured here."

     And then I woke up.


Here it ended, but at the foot of the page was written: "Dear Miss
Staveley, I hope this hasn't bored you. I thought I should like you to
know that I now and then have a thought beyond book selling.

"Yours sincerely,
"PATRICK ST. QUENTIN."


Patrick was in the shop that evening when Ben left.

He said nothing, but looked expectant.

"Good night, Mr. St. Quentin," said Ben, holding out her hand. "But
really I ought to be cross with you because you made me neglect my work
for over an hour."

Patrick glowed.

"You have given me a totally new God," she said, "and I'm going home to
think about Him."




XXXIX


Guy drove straight from the station to Ben's office. Like Cecil, he,
too, was bronzed and hard and the typical soldier with his little trim
moustache, but he looked worried.

He embraced her with ardour. "You're very pretty," he said. "I'd
forgotten."

"Nonsense," said Ben. "I'm a 'capable woman'; no more and no less."

He held er at arm's length. "You're very attractive," he said. "I can't
think why you're not married."

"I've given you one reason," said Ben. "'Capable women' remain free."

"Every woman should be married," said Guy.

"Especially Melanie," said Ben, laughing. But Guy did not laugh. His
face clouded.

"Oh, my hat!" he said. "That's what I came to talk to you about. Before
I went home even. By the way, how is the governor?"

"Just the same," said Ben. "His capacity for bearing other people's
calamities with fortitude, as somebody said, develops every day."

"And the step?" he asked.

"Oh, she's all right," said Ben; "you'll like her."

"Rolls, too, doesn't she?" Guy inquired.

"Rolls," said Ben.

"Does she let the governor touch it?" asked Guy.

"How little you seem to know of your own father!" said Ben. "And I
thought of you as a wise child."

"I may have been once," said Guy, "but that's all over. Oh, the mess
I've been getting into!"

"What kind of a mess?" Ben asked anxiously.

"On the boat," said Guy.

"Cards?" she asked.

"No, I wish it was. No, I've--well, the fact is, Ben, my dear, I'm
engaged."

"I know that," said Ben. "You've been engaged for years. Don't Melanie
and I live together, and don't I see her watching for the postman?"

"Oh, cut that out," said Guy, with a groan. "That's not the engagement
I mean. I'm engaged to someone else, someone I met on the boat."

"My dear Guy," said Ben, "this is awful."

"Don't I know it?" said Guy.

"But I mean for Melanie," said Ben.

"For both of us," said Guy.

"Can't you break off the new affair?" Ben asked.

"I suppose I could if I wanted to," said Guy. "But I don't. I'm potty
about her. The other thing was a ghastly mistake. Surely," he went on,
"you would rather I discovered the mistake while there was yet time
than go on with it and ruin both our lives? I know it sounds like a
novel, but you know what I mean."

"Yes," said Ben, "I quite agree with that. But I wonder if it hasn't
been too quick for you to be sure about yourself? You've known one girl
five years and the other less than five weeks."

"That's true," said Guy. "But I don't think time means much. What about
love at first sight?"

"I know," said Ben. "But liner love--especially Indian liner love--is
supposed to be particularly misleading."

"This isn't," said Guy firmly. "This is the goods. I may be impulsive,"
he went on, "but I'm not an ass; at any rate I'm not a silly ass. I've
kept my eyes open, and I'll bet you that for every marriage that has
gone wrong after a very short engagement I can show you two that have
gone equally wrong after a long one."

"I think that's exceedingly probable," said Ben, with a sigh. "What I
am thinking is not that you are any less likely to be happy with your
new girl than with Melanie; I am thinking of Melanie herself and what
is to be done about her. What do you mean to do? She's expecting you
to-day; looking forward to it. What do you mean to do?"

"Well," said Guy, "that's just it. I was wondering if you would help
me, if you would explain."

Ben laughed bitterly. "Me again!" she said. "'Always go to Ben when
you're in a mess!' Has the liner girl got any money?" she asked.

"Money! What's money?" said Guy. "Don't be squalid."

"Melanie's two hundred a year might be very useful," said Ben.

"You're too late," said Guy. He pulled at his absurd moustache. "But
if you wouldn't mind breaking it to Melanie tactfully, and letting her
down gently, you'd be a brick. And I'm sure you could; no one could
do it better. And, by Jove! you advertise to do it too--'Domestic
Problems.' Now compared with this one, all other domestic problems are
'also rans.' Be a darling, Ben, and smooth things with Melanie. After
all, she's not a child; she knows that in this kind of matter minds
often change."

"I know Melanie pretty well," said Ben, "and I should guess you're
making a very foolish mistake. She may look bored and take too little
trouble to make you her slave, but she's true as steel and she's as
fond of you as she can be. And another thing, she's always amusing;
and from what I know of life, a girl who is always amusing is not to
be lightly turned down. It isn't fair to break a long engagement like
this, without seeing her again first."

"Oh, as to that," said Guy, "engagements are being broken every day;
why not ours? You will help me, won't you?"

Ben stood up. "No, Guy," she said, "I won't. Not like that, anyway.
Usually when people ask me to do things I comply. But not if I don't
believe I ought to. In your case I am certain that you, and you alone,
are the person to explain. It would be very cowardly not to, and you
are a soldier and therefore not a coward. You owe it to Melanie to
tell her yourself, face to face; and the sooner you do it, the better.
That's my last word."

"I think you're very selfish," said Guy.

"I can't help what you think," said Ben. "That's my last word. She'll
be at home after five. I shan't get back till seven or later. And now I
must earn my living."

Guy went off like a bear, and Ben spent a wretched day thinking about
Melanie's misery and deploring the fickleness of men and Staveleys.

She was therefore the more rejoiced when on reaching Aubrey Walk she
heard Melanie singing in her room and found her arraying herself in her
best, preparatory to dining with Guy and going to the play.

Ben expressed no surprise.

"How did Guy strike you?" she asked, after a while.

"At first he seemed awfully gloomy," said Melanie. "He didn't even seem
to want to kiss me. But after a little while he got quite like his
old self again, only more so, and was the nicest thing on earth, and
he wants the wedding directly. This week if possible, he said; but of
course that's absurd."

At that moment Guy's taxi was heard and he came bounding up the stairs,
while Melanie retired to complete her toilet.

He put his fingers on his lips as he met his sister. "Not a word," he
said. "It's all right. That other affair was a mistake. Those Indian
liners, you know. That proverb about being off with the old love is a
very sound one, and almost directly I saw Mel again I knew I didn't
want to be on with the new."

"Have you told the new?" Ben asked.

"Not yet," he said. "I was wondering if you----"

Ben drew back. "Not I!" she exclaimed.

Guy burst into roars of triumphant laughter. "You bought it!" he cried,
and roared again. "What I was going to say," he went on, "was that I
was wondering if you would--post this letter to her. I haven't got a
stamp."

Ben threw a cushion at him with masterly accuracy, as Melanie, all
radiance and joy, came into the room.




XL


Merrill, looking very attractive in her weeds, sat in Ben's room,
interfering not a little with "The Beck and Call's" machinery. But
that, of course, is the principal industry of all widows who call on
business people.

"I call it very selfish and horrid of Alicia," she said. "Here she is,
about to marry this rich old ironmonger----"

"Ironmaster," Ben corrected.

"Ironmaster, then. It's the same thing," said Merrill. "Here she is,
anyway, about to be happy herself and have all her worries about money
and about the boys removed for ever, and she has the cheek to say that
I oughtn't even to see Roland--that's Captain Andrews, you know--for
another three months. What do you think of that?"

"Well," said Ben, "I disagree. I think you should do exactly as you
want to."

"And marry at once?"

"Certainly, if you want to. It's nobody's affair but yours and his.
You are definitely engaged, aren't you?"

"Of course," said Merrill.

"And there's nothing to prevent you marrying except the possibility of
public opinion disapproving?"

"No," said Merrill, "but people are very horrid."

"You mustn't mind people," said Ben. "Surely you know that? If we mind
people life isn't worth living. The only thing to consider is your
happiness. If you had been happy with Egbert you would not want to
marry again so soon, or possibly not at all; but as you weren't happy
with him I don't see any reason for you to wait."

"The whole question of time is absurd," said Merrill. "Who is it that
fixes the interval? Why should a year be all right and eleven months
all wrong? It is ridiculous--with life galloping on in the monstrous
way it does."

"Well," said Ben, with a despairing glance at the letters waiting to be
attended to, "the remedy is yours. Defy public opinion, and marry next
week. Go and be registered; get a special licence; anything. But do it."

"I was wondering," said Merrill, "whether we might not marry now
secretly and go abroad, and then come back and announce it. That would
kill two birds with one stone: we should be married at once, and all
those horrid cats, including darling Alicia, would be silenced."

"You never silence horrid cats," said Ben. "And I'm against anything
secret. And I don't suppose Captain Andrews would care about it either."

"I think he would do as I wish," said Merrill, with a confident smile.

Only if he liked the wish himself, thought Ben, remembering the quiet
decisiveness of the plus-four warrior; but all she said was that it was
a pity that Merrill was such a coward.

"A coward!" exclaimed the widow. "How can you? You are as bad as
Alicia. And you have been a great disappointment to me, too. I always
thought of you as being so kind and comforting, and all you do is to
look absent-minded and call me a coward."

"My dear," said Ben, "I have encouraged you in every possible way. I
have even urged you to marry at once, which is what you say you want to
do."

"I don't know that I do want it," said Merrill. "I don't want to do
anything that would be unfair to Roland. I don't mind about myself,
even though you think I do, but I should never forgive myself if
through marrying too soon Roland lost anyone's respect. I am going
now," she said sadly. "I am sorry to have troubled you."

"Good-bye, darling," said Ben. "You have never looked prettier. If you
want someone really sympathetic to talk to, step in the shop downstairs
and ask Mr. Harford to recommend you a good book. He's the one in
tweeds."

"I was thinking of doing so," said Merrill. "I noticed him as I came
in. Good-bye; I hope you'll be nicer next time."

"Good-bye, darling," said Ben. "You have never looked prettier. I think
Roland the most enviable of men."

"Cat!" said Merrill, returning suddenly and flinging her arms round
Ben's neck. "No, not cat--sweetest of hearts! But oh, I'm so miserable!"

She cried luxuriously for a minute and then jumped up smiling.

"I shall let Roland decide," she said.




XLI


"This is rather a blow, your brother coming back," said Tubby Toller,
looking round Ben's office with a critical eye. "It's done our little
circle in. Why, he wants to be married in five minutes. Highly
suspicious, I call it."

"What do you mean--suspicious?" Ben asked.

"When a fellow who's been engaged for years clamours suddenly to marry,
all in a moment, it suggests that he's in danger, has lost his nerve,
wants to be pulled into safety," said Tubby. "I rather fancy Master Guy
has been singeing his wings."

"Oh, Tubby! how cynical you are!" said Ben. "What will you be like when
you're fifty?"

"At fifty," said Tubby, "I shall be a child again. I notice a strong
tendency in middle-aged men to become childish. But aren't I right
about your brother?"

"You must ask someone else," said Ben.

"And I'll tell you something more," said Tubby. "When you're married
and your husband suddenly begins to give you pearl necklaces and
diamond rings, look out. They're more likely to be from the guilty
conscience than the loving heart."

"Oh, Tubby, shut up!" said Ben. "You're insufferable. But what is it
you want? You didn't come here merely to be destructively clever, I'm
sure."

"I came to look round," said Tubby. "After all, a parent may inspect
his young, mayn't he? And I consider 'The Beck and Call' largely my own
child. How is it doing?"

"Not so badly," said Ben. "I've just carried out an American commission
that netted quite a lot."

"Thank God for America!" said Tubby. "As Canning said, or meant to,
'The New World was called in very largely to redress the bank balances
of the Old.' Could you get me a lady-cook?"

"What for?" Ben asked.

"To be a lady and to cook, of course," he said.

"How many in family?" Ben asked.

"Just the three of us," he said.

"Three? Who is the other?" Ben asked.

"Myself--1," he replied; "the lady--2; the cook--3."

"No, I couldn't," said Ben. "I couldn't lend myself to such a
_ménage_."

"But it would be all right," said Tubby. "The cook would act as
chaperon when I was talking with the lady; and the lady would be on the
watch when I was visiting the kitchen. I want a lady-cook. I feel I
should be a better man if I had the constant society of a lady-cook--or
a cook-lady, I don't mind which."

"No," said Ben firmly.

"Then will you get me a valet-governess?" Tubby asked. "I have a
passion for hyphenated assistance."

"You haven't got any children," said Ben.

"No, but I have clothes," said Tubby. "And I'll hire a child. Anything
to persuade a valet-governess to stay."

"Tubby, you're wasting my time," said Ben. "Go back to the Treasury or
wherever it is you sleep."

"Listen to her!--" Tubby invoked the ceiling. "She advertises herself
as 'The Beck and Call' and she turns away business! She is rude to
clients! I came here with money in my purse to try and do you a good
turn, and you spurn me. Now, my dear Ben, be serious. Will you get me a
chauffeur-billiard-marker?"

"No!" said Ben, lifting up a paper-weight, as Tubby made for the door.

He did, however, go; but three minutes later reappeared.

"I've been talking to the sportsman outside," he said. "A clever child.
I have asked him to come to me as a butler-secretary and he seems keen.
Do you mind?"

"If you rob me of Dolly," said Ben, "I'll never speak to you again."

"I must do something," said Tubby. "It would be a very serious thing
for you if I went about London telling everybody that I had been to
'The Beck and Call' with quite a number of needs and not one could you
satisfy. Grant me one request anyway. Grant me!"

"What is it?" said Ben.

"Give me leave to read a novel by Erckmann-Chatrian."

And this time he went.




XLII


She was a plump and kindly lady of a little more than middle age, with
evidences of wealth about her and a handkerchief ready for service.

"You don't know me," she said to Ben, "but I know you, or rather all
about you. In a kind of way we're relations."

Ben expressed her surprise.

"If there is such a thing as a step-aunt," said the lady, "I'm one. I'm
Belle's sister."

"Oh!" said Ben. "Mrs. Vicat?"

Her visitor admitted it.

"Of course," said Ben, sympathetically. "I've heard about you. Your son
died quite recently. I'm so sorry."

The handkerchief came into play.

"Yes," said Mrs. Vicat. "He never had a chance, he was so badly
wounded. But he lingered on and on and was always so brave. And now
he's gone. It's because I want to do something in memory of him that
I'm here. My sister told me to come to you. 'Go to "The Beck and
Call,"' she said, 'and talk to my stepdaughter. She's very clever and
quick at thinking of things. But of course you must pay,' she said.

"As if I should take advantage of being connected with the family!"
Mrs. Vicat added indignantly. "So you must charge me for all the time
you give me, my dear, whether anything comes of it or not."

"We'll see," said Ben. "What kind of a memorial were you thinking of?"

"Well," said Mrs. Vicat. "At first I was thinking of an obelisk or a
cross, or something like that. You know the kind of thing. There's one
in Sloane Square. But somehow I've rather changed my mind. There are so
many of those, all over the country, and I'm wondering if it's quite
right to put up another just to one officer.

"And of course," she continued, "there will be a monument in the
church: that's all arranged for. I've got a nice architect--one that
will let me have my own way a little, I'm assured; not one of those
masterful quarrelsome ones. Architects can be very trying, my dear.
You should see our house--all the living rooms and the bedrooms on
the north, and the passages and the kitchen and larder on the south!
Everything sacrificed to the entrance! My poor dear husband argued with
him night and day, but he was too much for us. But that's neither here
nor there. The monument is all arranged; it's the memorial I'm worrying
about now, and Belle told me to come to you."

"How much do you want to spend?" Ben asked.

"I don't mind," said Mrs. Vicat forlornly. "It's the only interest in
life I have left."

"Had your son any particular hobbies?" Ben asked. "Did he support any
particular kind of charity?"

"I can't say that he did," said Mrs. Vicat. "He had a wonderful
collection of postage stamps. But that doesn't help much."

"No," said Ben, puckering her brow. "And yet," she continued, "you
would like it to be useful?"

"Yes, I want it to be really helpful," said Mrs. Vicat. "I want my
son's name to be associated with something that would benefit people. I
saw a very pretty drinking-fountain the other day, which was also a War
Memorial."

"But you could afford something bigger than that?" Ben suggested.

"Oh, yes, money is no object. The cenotaph is very beautiful."

"Very," said Ben. "But that has a distinct purpose and you wouldn't
wish to duplicate it."

"On the top of a hill," said Mrs. Vicat. "There's a beautiful high hill
near us. Another cenotaph there would be most impressive."

"But isn't a cenotaph a monument to someone whose real burial place is
somewhere else or isn't known?" Ben asked.

"Is it?" said Mrs. Vicat. "I didn't know. I thought it meant a War
Memorial simply."

"Since you have come to me for advice," said Ben, "I must say what I
feel about this, and that is that in memory and honour of your son you
ought to do something of real practical help for his fellow-soldiers
in distress. There are many incurables among them, and you could, for
example, build and endow a home--say at the seaside--for them--to be
comfortable in. That's an idea that occurs to me as I am talking."

"I should like that," said Mrs. Vicat. "That's a very nice idea. Belle
said you were clever. And of course at the seaside, because then I
could go down and visit it. I'm very fond of the sea. Do you know
Littlehampton? I've been very happy there in that terrace overlooking
the green where the children ride on donkeys. We took a house there one
summer and stayed on through the winter. So mild. A seaside home at
Littlehampton is a charming notion."

"If you would give me a little time to think and perhaps discuss the
matter with others," said Ben, "I am sure I could put some more ideas
before you. I should like to; it's the kind of task that would give me
great pleasure to carry out. Will you come to-morrow at three?"

And Mrs. Vicat agreed, and, dabbing afresh at her eyes, made her way to
her very luxurious limousine.

"Your employer is very clever," were her last words to Dolly, who
helped her downstairs, as she gave him a shilling. On this, being a
superstitious London boy, he was mindful, as soon as the car had moved
on, to spit.




XLIII


At dinner that evening, Melanie was sounded as to the memorial, but
Melanie had her own affairs in hand. When a girl is within a few days
of her marriage, she can't concentrate on outside questions such as
this, no matter how humane she may be.

She was an odd girl, with no romance showing, whatever there might be
underneath. Her eyes were incapable of surprise; her mind of wonder.
It is a great loss, and too many girls seem to be suffering from it.
In speech she was candid; in hearing, careless; very particular that
you should not misunderstand her, but not in the least worried by the
chance of misunderstanding you--often, indeed, not listening to replies
at all.

These are not qualities that on the face of them make for the happiest
unions, but along with them Melanie had a great sense of duty, and one
never knows how a girl may develop after marriage. Men and husbands are
not so widely different; but girls and brides can be divided by such
a gulf as to be almost strangers. A girl passing under her lover's
glamour can emerge a changed being.

"We had a bit of a shindy to-day, Guy and I," said Melanie. "Over the
ring. He wants me to have a wedding ring and I refused. I can't bear
the things. They make me shudder. It's bad enough to go to church with
him and endure that disgusting service, without being branded for
ever more with a gold band. It's only one remove from the ring in the
bull's nose. I'm no more Guy's wife because I've got it than I should
be without it. If I agree to marry him, I marry him. A very unbecoming
piece of metal on my hand can't make the difference, not to a decent
woman."

"It was a new idea to Guy, I expect," said Ben.

"Absolutely," said Melanie. "He seemed thunderstruck."

"He's not so advanced as you," said Ben. "And I expect he was
perplexed, because you don't mind wearing an engagement ring."

"That's different," said Melanie. "It's beautiful. There's some reason
for that. But even that I don't wear on the ordinary finger. Why should
all the world know I'm engaged? Guy doesn't wear a ring to advertise
the fact; why should I?"

"He probably would if you asked him," said Ben. "And he'd wear a
wedding ring too. He'd be proud to."

"Don't you think I'm right?" Melanie asked.

"No, I don't," said Ben. "Apart altogether from the fact that Guy
is my brother, I don't think it's fair to either of you. Take your
honeymoon, for example. I don't know where you're going, but probably
to some hotel. The first thing the people at the desk look at is your
left hand, and if there's no wedding ring on it your character has gone
completely, and Guy's is not what it might be."

"But who cares what anyone else thinks?" Melanie asked.

"All of us," said Ben, "in one way or another. But this is a case where
both of you ought to agree. If Guy took your attitude about wedding
rings, I shouldn't have a word to say; but as he objects, I think you
ought to give way."

"Confound your cold common sense," said Melanie. "I will think about
it. But this public flaunting of one's bondage is hateful."

"You may not think it bondage later on," said Ben. "If you don't,
you're all right. If you're going to for ever, I wish you'd break the
whole thing off at this moment."

Melanie left her chair, and, going over to Ben, gave her a light kiss
on her hair.

"Don't worry," she said.

It was more reassuring than any other woman's oath on the Good Book.

After dinner Ben carried the problem to Uncle Paul, whom she found
looking utterly miserable.

"My dear!" said Ben. "You're not ill, are you? You frighten me."

"No," said Uncle Paul weakly. "I'm not bodily ill. But life is a
blank--they're cleaning out the Round Pond."

Ben put the matter before him.

"As step-aunt," she said, "doesn't mind what she spends, isn't this a
gorgeous opportunity to do something really worth doing? And she's so
absurdly amenable, ready to take advice. Just like putty. There never
was such a chance to be really useful.

"So many things," she continued, "begin well and then decline. Village
reading-rooms, with stone tablets in the wall saying in whose honour
they were built, are opened with a great flourish, and the next
time you go there they are closed and the windows broken. Clubs and
institutes the same. But we can provide against all that. It mustn't
be enough just to build; there must be endowment, and responsible
caretakers or managers, for whatever we do.

"I suppose," she continued, "as a matter of fact, country people don't
want Village institutes; they want the village pump. That's where they
really enjoy meeting and talking."

"Some friends of mine," said Uncle Paul, "made a beautiful garden in
their village, as a memorial. A lawn in the midst for the children
to play on, and seats and shelters all round for the old people. And
flowers. All properly looked after. That was a really good idea."

"I like that," said Ben. "But there might be something more costly too.
I shall go on thinking. And I'll ask Mr. St. Quentin."




XLIV


The next morning when Ben entered "The Booklovers' Rest" it appeared to
be empty. Not a sign even of Ernie Bent, who usually had to be removed
from the doorstep, which he was scrubbing, to let her pass.

And then from the depths came the wistful words:


     Bring back, bring back,
     Bring back my Bonnie to me, to me!


and Patrick hobbled out.

"I didn't know it was you," he said, and flushed.

"I wanted to try your pet divination scheme again," said Ben. "May I?"

"Of course," said Patrick.

"I will just fumble for a book," said Ben.

She closed her eyes, approached the shelves and took down a volume.
Then she opened it, read a few words, and smiled.

"Was it all right?" Patrick asked.

"I think so," she said, and was about to run up the stairs, but
stopped. "Oh, by the way, Mr. St. Quentin," she said, "I've got a
client coming to-day to talk about a memorial to her son: something
philanthropic and costly. If I were to ask you to come up and join us,
could you--would you?"

"With the greatest pleasure," said Patrick, "especially as there's a
catalogue due and I ought to be at work on it. But neglecting work is
so agreeable."

"Soon after three," said Ben, and ascended to her own domain.

When there, however, she received a shock, for instead of the ordinary
placid and competent Jan, was a nervous unhappy Jan, saying that she
had been to see the doctor on the evening before and he had ordered her
to stop work instantly and go to Bournemouth or Torquay.

"Of course I shall do nothing of the kind until I can find you someone
else," she said, "but I know I'm not well. I've been feeling weak for a
long while now and I have horrible nights."

"I'm very sorry," said Ben. "It's a good deal my fault too, for
allowing you to go on having no proper lunch and getting no midday
break. I blame myself seriously, but you know, Jan, you were very
obstinate. What does the doctor say it is?"

"He's afraid I may go into a decline," said Jan, "unless I have good
air, and do nothing, and drink milk and eat a lot; and--and--I'd much
rather be with you."

Mrs. Vicat arrived puffingly to time and again placed her handkerchief
within easy range.

"Well, my dear," she said, "what have you decided? I hope it's the
Littlehampton home."

"I want you to hear what Mr. St. Quentin, one of the owners of the book
shop downstairs, has to say," said Ben.

She rang the bell for Dolly and asked him to invite Mr. St. Quentin to
step up.

"This is Mrs. Vicat," said Ben, and she prepared the ground. "Have you
any ideas?"

"As a matter of fact, I have," said Patrick. "I have been thinking of
nothing else all the morning, and I believe I have the answer. May I
say how it strikes me; and you will forgive me if I am too long?

"I've been thinking," he said, "of the men blinded in the war. They
have always been on my mind, but I never had a chance to help. Losing
limbs is a disaster of a totally different kind; it's a bore, of
course, to have a wooden leg, and be unable to join in sports any
more, and so on; but it's nothing to squeal about. Whereas losing
sight--that's terrible.

"I should doubt if any quarrel between nations is worth such a price as
one blinded man.

"Sight is too glorious a possession. I have been shutting my eyes at
intervals all the morning and realizing what it must be like never to
open them again.

"'Never'--that is the appalling word.

"I don't mean only what every one who cares anything for the beauty
of nature would miss--the first primrose, the new moon, a starry
night, a yacht race, snow on the trees. Those are the obvious things
and probably many a soldier had thought little enough about them. But
put yourself in the position of a blinded soldier and think of his
loss. The pretty girls, for example. That must be a loss indeed--the
faces and figures of the pretty girls. You know how soldiers in their
shirt-sleeves lean on the sills of barrack windows and compare notes
on the girls who pass? Not too edifying perhaps, but think of the poor
devils who can do this no more.

"And games--never to see another football match, another cricket match.
I have seen blind men led into Lord's and watched their poor baulked
faces as the sound of the bat against the ball is heard and the crowd
cheers a boundary hit. They like to be there--they have the sense of
still being in it; they can't bear not to participate in life--but the
loss!

"I have seen them in theatres and music halls too, often; and there the
spoken word still has its message; but oh, their baffled look when the
laughter depends upon gesture!

"And then think of what blindness must mean to those who have loved
pictures. The sense of touch, intensely developed, may reveal much, and
certainly the beauty of shape, but it can convey no idea of colour.
Finger tips passing over the surface of a Corot learn nothing of its
beauty; the National Gallery for ever more is blotted out."

Patrick paused and blushed.

"I'm sorry," he said, "I didn't mean to become rhetorical. But it's too
sad and I was carried away."

Mrs. Vicat, who had been quietly weeping for some time, implored him to
go on.

"Everything you say is so right," she assured him. "And what do you
propose?"

"I haven't any very useful suggestions," Patrick said, "but the
endowment of new Braille presses might be considered. Many of the men,
however, cannot be very much given to reading. What about broadcasting
installations? They are all fond of music. Why shouldn't there be a
grant of a wireless set to all institutions or houses where blinded
soldiers are to be found?"

"There's nothing I wouldn't like to do for the blinded soldiers," said
Mrs. Vicat, when he had finished. "And if you can arrange the Braille
presses and the broadcasting too, I'll gladly pay what is necessary;
but I had"--she almost whimpered--"set my heart on a seaside home, and
I don't see that for the blind that is needed. What they want, as I
understand it, is to be kept employed, beguiled; their minds and hands
are to be continuously occupied so that they mayn't brood and mope.
Isn't that it?"

"Yes," said Patrick. "That's a very great part of it. That's certainly
the kindest thing we can do--to find them absorbing occupations and to
make life a pleasure, if not actually an excitement, still."

"When I came in," said Mrs. Vicat to Ben, "I fancied that girl at the
desk outside was crying. Is she unhappy?"

"Poor Jan!" said Ben. "Yes, she's just had a great shock. The doctor
has told her that she must stop work and retire to some southern place,
or she is in danger of going into a decline. She's miserable about
it--partly for herself but a great deal for me, because she doesn't
like to leave me in the lurch, she says."

"Ah!" said Mrs. Vicat, with sudden cheeriness, "now I've got it!"

She beamed on them with radiant triumph.

"What?" exclaimed Ben.

"The seaside home," she said. "We'll have the seaside home after all.
Not for blinded soldiers--they shall be dealt with all right, Mr. St.
Quentin, never fear!--but for poor working girls who need change and
rest from London and can't afford it. Oh, how happy I am! I did so want
that seaside home and now I've got it. Your poor girl can't go there
this time because it won't be ready; but will you see about it at once,
my dear? I leave the whole thing to you. You can build a new house or
you can take an old house and adapt it. I'll have all the papers made
out by my lawyer at once. And we'll call it the 'Adrian Vicat Seaside
Home.' Will you do it?"

"Of course I will," said Ben.

"And you'll find out all about the other things?" Mrs. Vicat inquired
of Patrick.

"At once," he said.

"I'm so happy," exclaimed Mrs. Vicat again. "Now my mind is perfectly
at rest."

She went away in tearful content and Dolly was summoned to assist her
again to the car and to receive the usual guerdon.

"Thank you," said Ben to Patrick. "You were splendid. I think we may
call this a truly red-letter day. It's all most inspiring; but one
thing in particular gives me enormous satisfaction."

"And that?" Patrick asked.

"You and I were in absolute agreement."

"But you didn't say a word."

"No, there was no need. But when I tried the Sortes Virgilianæ this
morning what do you think I stumbled on? Milton."

"Well?" said Patrick.

"Well, it opened at 'Samson Agonistes'!"




XLV


"I set out intending to pay you just a friendly call," said Aunt
Agatha, "but coming through the shop downstairs I saw such a lot of
books that now I'm going to be a client too. You see they gave me an
idea. I'd quite forgotten what a lot of books there are in the world
and how little I know of them. But now I think I really must try to
know more, so I want you to find me a nice girl to read to me. A girl
with a clear voice, mind. From half-past five to seven, I think. No,
there are often callers then. From half-past two till tea. No, that's
when I sometimes like a nap. In the morning, then. No, one mustn't be
read to in the morning. Well, my dear, let it be after lunch then,
and if I fall asleep now and again it doesn't really matter. But she
mustn't read what they call bed books."

"I wonder if you really want me to get the girl at all," said Ben.

"Of course I do, dear. It's terrible, it's disgraceful, to think of how
little time I have left in which to learn anything of all those books,
and I'm sure I couldn't read them to myself. Please get me a nice girl
with a refined and distinct voice--so many girls have adenoids, don't
you think?--to begin, not next week but the week after next. I'll spend
next week in clearing up and getting ready for her.

"I suppose a girl is best," she continued after a moment's thought.
"A young man wouldn't do? And yet I see such lots of advertisements
in _The Times_ Personal Column--how interesting that is and how sad
sometimes!--I'm told that all those funny love letters, as they sound
like, are really burglars' codes. Isn't that dreadful? But so every
one says. But about this gentleman reader, there are such lots of
advertisements from disabled officers wanting employment that perhaps
one ought to consider one. I wonder how disabled officers read aloud,
dear? Rather strong voices, I'm afraid, after so much drilling. I
shouldn't like to be shouted at. Speaking of disabled officers, there's
a rather nice lame man in the shop downstairs who showed me the way up.
I suppose you've noticed him, dear? I think I must buy something from
him on the way out, so as not to disappoint him. I wonder if he's got
a Longfellow? I used to love Longfellow when I was a girl. That man
getting another to propose for him and the other one being the real
one--I haven't read it for years. We might begin with that.

"I hope someone is going to propose to you, my dear," Aunt Agatha went
on. "So pretty and clever as you are, and so managing. People tell
me this office is wonderfully run. I don't say I want you to marry
the lame man downstairs, but I'm sure he's a gentleman, he has such a
charming voice, and he's very good-looking. All but the leg. But legs
aren't everything. What's that proverb about helping a lame man over a
stile? How well you'd do that!

"I hope I'm not taking up your time, dear," Aunt Agatha continued; "but
it's such a long while since you came to see me, and if I'm a nuisance
you must make me pay half a crown, or whatever it is you charge for an
hour's interview."

"What makes you think Mr. St. Quentin, the lame man downstairs, would
make me a good husband?" Ben asked.

"I liked the look of him," said Aunt Agatha. "He looked kind and he's
a gentleman. And I don't think it's a bad thing to be a book seller.
Anyone may do that now, and he'd bring you home the new novels.
Besides, it's a good thing to marry a man who's out of the house all
day. I hate to see husbands in to lunch. All wrong. Home lunches are
for women. Besides, my dear, there's an epidemic of marrying in the
Staveley family and you'll catch it. You can't escape. Look at your
father! And then I'm told that Alicia is engaged again to someone at
Hove. A widower. I always said that Hove was too near Brighton. What
is the proverb--'Marry in----' Oh, no, it's not Hove, it's Hastings:
'Marry in Hastings and repent at leisure.' How silly of me, but they're
both on the South Coast.

"And poor Merrill, she came to see me the other day. All in black, the
rouge, and looking so demure; but if I were one of those bookmakers who
advertise in the papers that they never pay, I'd go so far as to bet a
pony--it was a pony that your uncle always put on for me on the Derby
favourite year after year, but how seldom the favourites win!--I'd
bet a pony, whatever it means, that she's got another man in her eye.
I could see him lurking there, the rascal, and not a clergyman this
time, I'll be bound. I taxed her with it, and she said 'No' with such a
pretty blush that there wasn't any doubt at all.

"And then there's Guy come all the way from India to marry your friend.
It's wonderful, I think, that that engagement should have lasted so
long, and he in India too, where men fall in love so easily. They say
that absence makes the heart grow fonder, but don't you believe it, my
dear. There's a better proverb than that which says, 'Out of sight, out
of mind.' But I can't admire Guy's constancy too much; he's a regular
Don Juan; no, I don't mean that--Don Quixote; no, that other man,
without fear and without reproach--Bayard. He's a regular Bayard. Not
only to have gone all through his life in India loving her truly, but
to have been faithful on the ship too! That's marvellous. I have the
deepest respect for him. Indeed, my dear, I almost rank him with you.

"It shows how susceptible all you Staveleys are, and unless you're
very careful, my dear, you'll fall too. You ought to be inoculated.
Not that inoculation's any good. I never had such severe colds as
after the doctor injected what he called my own culture into my arm.
Culture--I didn't know I'd got any. I thought that was confined to
the universities. But sneeze! You should have heard me. Perhaps you
did--I'm only about a mile from Campden Hill. Well, dear, I'm a foolish
old woman and I'm sure I've talked a lot of rubbish; but I'm very fond
of you and you always do me good.

"And now I must be going. I'm so glad to have seen you in your place
of business. And you'll get me a nice girl, won't you? We decided on
a girl, didn't we? Yes, I think it must be a girl, because sometimes I
should like her to take me to the pictures instead of reading. Reading
can be rather tedious. And it would never do for me to go to the
pictures with a disabled officer, would it? A nice girl, then. The week
after next. Half-past two to four. Without adenoids."




XLVI


Ben was receiving her first visit from her stepmother.

"First of all let me thank you so much for being so kind to my sister,"
Belle said. "She's not a very decisive person. Perhaps you gathered
that?"

Ben admitted it.

"Anyone at all emphatic can do what they like with her," said Belle.
"And that's why I'm so glad she's in your hands.

"But that's not what I came about," said the comfortable lady as she
sank luxuriously into a chair. "You must forgive me butting in like
this, but I want help badly and only you can give it."

"The cook hasn't left?" Ben asked.

"Oh, no. She seems to be satisfied, if one dare use such a strong word
about a cook, or indeed any servant, nowadays. No, it's not the cook,
it's your father."

"Yes?" said Ben.

"Well, it's rather a difficult thing to talk about to a daughter--and
a stepdaughter too--and one knows what stepmothers are supposed to
be--but I'm all at sea about him. He's so different from what I was
expecting--from what he promised, in fact. When we were talking about
the second marriage he was so thoughtful and considerate of me, so
generous, always brought me flowers or some little thing, and you know
how fond I am of _marrons glacés_--too fond, the doctor says--and I was
very lonely, you know, and I had felt so neglected since Vincent died;
and it did really seem as if I was to have someone to pet me again
after all. Because Vincent, you know, was the kindest man. There was
nothing he wouldn't do to please me; he was always bringing cushions,
and arranging for week-ends in nice hotels, and motor trips.

"Well, so was your father at first; but this is what is troubling me:
Vincent kept it up to the end, but your father has dropped it already.
Now, what I want to know, dear, is this: is it just your father's way
or has he got tired of me?"

"Oh, I don't think he's got tired of you," said Ben, earnestly.

"Was he like that to your mother?" Belle asked.

"He wasn't very thoughtful of little things, ever," said Ben. "But he
was fond of her."

"Yes," said Belle. "But how did he show it? It isn't enough for me
to be merely in a house with a man; see him at dinner and watch him
reading the paper and, what is much worse, hearing him do it--you have
no notion how that rustling gets on one's nerves, when he turns over;
that isn't marriage to me. And he is so particular about the food and
the service. Was he always like that?"

"He was always rather--well, I might almost say fussy," Ben admitted.

"I wouldn't mind his fussiness if he was fussy over me too," said
Belle. "But he isn't. It is all for his own comfort. Of course we're
all selfish, I know. Every one's selfish. I'm selfish and I'm lazy.
But I do try to play the game, and I don't think he does. And I'm
getting frightened." She lowered her voice and drew her chair nearer.
"Because, I've got the idea that Vincent knows. I've got the idea that
he's looking. I can't say exactly where he's looking from; I can't see
him with my mind's eye at all--but I feel that he is looking. Out of
some kind of window up there, I suppose; for he was a good man, Vincent
was--a dear, good man, kind and open-handed and ready to think the best
of every one, even if he did use awful language sometimes and take a
little too much wine now and then; but he was so nice in his cups,
as they say, not like some people at all: gentle and exaggeratedly
polite, even though a little maudlin. In spite of all this, I'm
sure he's up there. But it's dreadful thinking that he's looking on
and knowing and being sorry for me and"--she sank her voice still
lower--"hating your father. Because, my dear, it's going to make me
hate him too. There, I've said it."

"Oh, no, Belle!" cried Ben. "You mustn't, you mustn't."

"But I can't help it," said Belle. "It's coming on, and if it gets
worse I shall leave him. There's nothing to stay for now"--she sobbed a
little--"but if it got worse it would be a sin to stay on."

While her stepmother had been talking Ben's thoughts had flown to
the future and all that the breaking up of her father's present
establishment would mean; but only hazily. Directly she was left alone
they assumed the clearest of outlines. For if her father were single
again what would he do? It was only too evident: he would request his
daughter to return. And what would she do? She would have to say yes.
She would not have the courage--or possibly even the right--to say no.
Horrible to lose all this independence, this amusing work just as it
was beginning to pay. But it would be inevitable, because he was her
father, and he was getting old, and she would have no real reason to
offer against it, being free as she was.

If it had been anyone else's father she would not have liked him at
all, she found herself thinking. Ought the accident of parentage to
entail such self-sacrificing devotion as it often does? Anyway, it did;
and so long as she was free she would probably have to return.

But supposing she was not free! Her heart fluttered.

If she were not free--if she had thrown in her lot with another--her
father would have no right....




XLVII


It was about half-past ten when the door of "The Beck and Call" office
opened and admitted Mr. St. Quentin.

Ben was alone. "Dolly has a day off," she said, "and Miss Marquard is
accumulating things for a number of our people, or I would ask you into
the back room.

"What is the news?" she asked.

"Oh, I mustn't talk about news," said Pat. "I've come as a client."

Ben laughed. "A client! That's splendid." She became very businesslike.
"What can we do for you to-day?"

"It's perhaps rather an odd request," said Pat, "but I was wondering if
you could help me to find--well, in point of fact, a wife. For myself,
I mean."

Ben reeled for a moment under the suddenness of the shock.

"A wife!" she then exclaimed, blushing a little and fumbling for her
notebook. Anything to regain composure!

"Yes," said Pat. "There's nothing so extraordinary about that, is
there? Lots of men have wanted wives ever since the world began. In
fact, there's a rumour that that is why it has gone on."

"Yes--I know--I've heard," Ben replied. She was recovering her nerve
now. "But we don't transact business like that here. You want a
matrimonial agency, if there are such things."

"No, I want 'The Beck and Call.' I have the greatest faith in it," said
Pat. "I believe it can get me one--if it will."

He looked at her with a smile in his grave eyes until she looked away;
but she was smiling too.

"I'm afraid----" she began.

"At any rate," he said briskly, "let me describe my requirements and
then perhaps you'll know better. Age, shall we begin with age?"

"If you insist on treating this as a marriage office, yes," said Ben.

"I do," said Pat. "Age, then: twenty-three or four."

"Yes," said Ben.

"But you haven't written it down," said Pat. "This is a serious
request. I am honestly asking your help, and I've never been a real
client before. First impressions, you know."

"Very well then," said Ben, making the note: "twenty-three or four."

"Height, medium," said Pat. "Hair, dark. Eyes, grey-blue. Have you got
all that?"

"I've taken it down," said Ben.

"Voice, musical," Pat went on. "Laugh, delicious."

Ben looked away as she affected to write.

"Is that essential?" she asked.

"Absolutely," said Pat. "Must be in business," he went on. "No idle
woman need apply. This kind of business would be all right."

"Do you mean she is to continue in business when she is married?" Ben
asked.

"I should leave that to her," said Pat; "but I hope so."

"Aren't you rather narrowing it down?" Ben asked. "Making it rather
difficult for yourself?"

"I was trying to make it more easy for 'The Beck and Call,'" he said.
"If the essentials are so explicitly stated, so little time need be
wasted on the search."

"You have been wonderfully explicit," said Ben. "But what about
yourself? The girl--if she is found--will naturally want to know
something about her husband, who at present, of course, is a stranger
to her. What is she to be told?"

"That he is utterly unworthy," said Pat; "a man of twenty-seven who was
knocked about in the War; a bit of a dreamer; a second-hand book seller
with an ambition to write; fairly amiable in temper; fairly sound in
health, but for a slight deficit in the number of legs normally served
out to men; and, although, as I said, utterly unworthy, filled, for a
woman of the kind specified, with worship, admiration, and love. Do you
think you could find a wife for a fellow like this?" he asked.

Ben was silent. She stood still with lowered eyes and a heart beating
much too fast, but very, very happy.

"Do you?" he asked again.

It was fortunate that no other inquirers arrived at that moment, for
they would have found something very like a Universal Aunt in the arms
of a second-hand book seller with only one leg.




XLVIII


Mr. Paul Mostyn to Miss Benita Staveley:


     "MY DEAREST BEN,

     "I have been a very long time in resorting to 'The Beck and Call'
     for assistance; but now I have a real need. Will you go to the
     best Bond Street jewellers and buy a ring regardless of cost?
     It is a wedding present for one I am very fond of. Choose it as
     though it were for yourself.

     "I am,
     "Your devoted,
     "UNCLE PAUL"




XLIX


Mr. Toby Staveley to Miss Benita Staveley:


     "DARLING OLD BEN,

     "What a lark! I am preparing the best suite in the place for your
     honeymoon. All the best, honey, from your loving brother,

     "TOBY STAVELEY
     "Manager
     "Fairmile Towers County Club, Ltd."


THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's Advisory Ben, by Edward Verrall (E. V.) Lucas


        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVISORY BEN: A STORY ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.