50 _wonderful_
                              WAYS to use
                                Lucerne
                               Sour Cream
                     _from Appetizers to Desserts_


                    RECIPES FROM THE TEST KITCHEN OF
                     THE AMERICAN DAIRY ASSOCIATION




                          _Why_ Sour Cream[1]?


    [Illustration: Why Sour Cream?]

Dear Mrs. Homemaker:

This cookbook has been designed to introduce you to the many wonderful
ways that sour cream may be used to impart fine flavor and texture to
the foods you prepare. This book has been developed because we felt that
the full story of sour cream’s versatility has not been told.

Sour cream does wonders for your meals from soups to desserts. It is not
a new product. In fact, our grandmothers and their mothers before them
relied on sour cream to add fine full flavor to their cooking and
baking.

Perhaps one reason all people are not familiar with the wonders of sour
cream is a result of the name itself. The word “sour” may be misleading.
Sour cream today is a far superior product to that used in grandma’s
day. Today’s product is made from Grade A cream which has been
pasteurized and homogenized. Lactic culture is added to produce a rich,
clean, medium sharp cultured flavor.

Sour cream may be obtained from your milkman or at the food store.
Review the sour cream recipes in this booklet and open the door to new
taste-thrilling meals. You will be so delighted that sour cream will
become one of your favorite cooking and baking ingredients.


[1]In many communities, dairy sour cream is referred to as SALAD CREAM.




                                contents


  APPETIZERS
      Anchovy Chip Dip                                                 6
      Shrimp Chip Dip                                                  6
      Sour Cream and Cheddar Chip Dip                                  6
      Tangy Sour Cream Dip                                             6
  BREADS
      Pineapple Coffee Cake                                           17
      Prune Bread                                                     18
      Sour Cream Nut Bread                                            17
  CAKES
      Chocolate Cream Cake                                            20
      Mahogany Sour Cream Cake                                        21
      Spicy Cream Cake                                                20
  CANDIES
      Chocolate Sour Cream Fudge                                      23
      Creamed Candied Nuts                                            23
  COOKIES
      Chocolate Chip Cream Cookies                                    22
      Chocolate Cream Drops                                           22
      Sour Cream Date Delights                                        21
      Sour Cream Oatmeal Cookies                                      22
  DESSERTS
      Frozen Cheese and Strawberry Dessert                            19
      Pineapple Apricot Refrigerator Cheese Cake                      19
      Delicious Sauce                                                 19
      Sour Cream and Apricot Dessert Sauce                            20
  MAIN DISHES
      Beef Stroganoff                                                  8
      Chicken Paprika                                                  9
      Fish Fillets in Sour Cream                                      10
      Hamburger Stroganoff                                             7
      Ham Noodle Bake                                                  9
      Lamb Stew with Sour Cream                                       11
      Paprika Schnitzel                                                8
      Sauerkraut Goulash                                              11
      Stuffed Veal Birds                                              11
      Swedish Sour Cream Meat Balls                                    8
      Swiss Steak with Sour Cream Gravy                               10
      Veal Chops in Sour Cream                                        10
  SALADS
      Beet Velvet Salad                                               15
      California Salad                                                14
      Caraway Cole Slaw                                               16
      Frozen Pineapple Salad                                          15
      Lime Fruit Mold                                                 16
      Lime-Lemon Layer Salad                                          16
      Potato Salad with Sour Cream Dressing                           15
  SALAD DRESSINGS
      Pineapple Cream Dressing                                        13
      Sour Cream Dressing                                             14
      Sour Cream Dressing for Shrimp                                  13
      Sour Cream Salad Dressing                                       14
  SANDWICH SPREADS
      Cheese and Pickle Sandwich Spread                               18
      Tuna Sour Cream Sandwich Filling                                18
  SOUPS
      Potato Soup                                                      7
  VEGETABLES
      Asparagus with Horseradish-Sour Cream Sauce                     13
      Baked Beets Juliene                                             13
      Corn in Sour Cream                                              12
      Sour Cream Scalloped Potatoes                                   12
      Green Beans Supreme                                             12




                              _appetizers_


Anchovy Chip Dip

                              Yield—2 Cups

  2 tablespoons anchovy paste
  ½ cup minced onion
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  1 tablespoon tarragon vinegar
  ½ cup dairy sour cream
  1 cup mayonnaise
  ½ cup finely chopped parsley

Combine all ingredients and mix well. Use as a dip for crackers or
potato chips.


Shrimp Chip Dip

                             Yield—1½ Cups

  1 5-ounce can shrimp, drained and chopped
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  ¼ cup chili sauce
  2 teaspoons lemon juice
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper
  1 teaspoon prepared horseradish
  Dash tabasco sauce

Cut the shrimp into very small pieces and mix well with the remaining
ingredients. Use as a dip or spread for potato chips or crackers.


Sour Cream and Cheddar Chip Dip

                              Yield—4 Cups

  2 cups dairy sour cream
  1½ cups shredded sharp cheddar cheese
  1 medium green pepper, chopped
  ½ cup chopped stuffed olives
  1 small onion, minced
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon paprika
  1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
  Dash tabasco sauce

Combine all ingredients and mix well. Chill several hours in the
refrigerator and serve with potato chips or small crackers.


Tangy Sour Cream Dip

                             Yield—1½ Cups

  1 cup dairy sour cream
  ⅓ to ½ cup drained horseradish
  1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
  ½ teaspoon celery seed
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon paprika

Combine sour cream with other ingredients and stir gently until blended.
Serve with crisp crackers or potato chips.




                                _soups_


A rule to remember in serving soup is that a swirl of sour cream may be
stirred into any clear soup or cream soup before serving. Top cream of
tomato soup, consomme or cream of mushroom soup with a spoonful of dairy
sour cream before serving. With fish soups, season the cream with a bit
of salt and ginger or curry powder.


Potato Soup

                           Yield—6-8 Servings

  ¼ cup butter
  4 cups potatoes, diced
  1 cup finely cut celery
  1 medium onion, chopped
  1 pimiento, minced
  2 tablespoons minced parsley
  4 cups broth, stock, or bouillon
  ½ teaspoon paprika
  1½ cups dairy sour cream

Melt butter in a large saucepan and saute the potatoes, celery, onion,
and pimiento until the onion begins to brown. Add the parsley and the
stock or bouillon and simmer until the vegetables are thoroughly cooked.
Season to taste. Remove from the heat and blend in the sour cream. Serve
at once.




                             _main dishes_


Hamburger Stroganoff

                           Yield—6-8 Servings

  ½ cup minced onion
  ¼ cup butter
  1 lb. ground beef
  1 clove garlic, finely chopped
  2 tablespoons flour
  2 teaspoons salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  1 lb. sliced mushrooms
  1 can cream of chicken soup, undiluted
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  Minced parsley or chives
  Chow mein noodles

Saute onion in butter until tender. Stir in all remaining ingredients
except soup, sour cream and parsley. Saute 5 minutes. Add soup; simmer,
uncovered for 10 minutes. Stir in sour cream; sprinkle with parsley.
Serve on chow mein noodles.


Paprika Schnitzel

                            Yield—6 Servings

  1½ lbs. veal cutlets or steaks
  3 tablespoons flour
  1 teaspoon salt
  2 teaspoons paprika
  3 tablespoons butter
  1 tablespoon butter
  1 medium onion, chopped
  1 4-oz. can button mushrooms, sliced
  2 tablespoons flour
  1 cup milk
  1 bay leaf, crumbled
  ½ teaspoon caraway seed
  1 cup dairy sour cream

Combine flour, salt and paprika and dredge veal in this. Melt 3 tbsp.
butter in a large skillet and brown veal. Cook until done. Remove from
skillet onto warm serving dish. Add 1 tablespoon butter, onion, and
mushrooms. Brown. Add 2 tablespoons flour, milk, bay leaf, and caraway
seeds. When thickened and hot, add the sour cream and blend. Serve over
the meat. Add salt if desired.


Beef Stroganoff

                          Yield—8-10 Servings

  1½ lbs. round steak
  1 lb. sliced fresh mushrooms
  1 cup butter
  2 lbs. Bermuda onions, finely chopped
  1 can condensed tomato soup
  1 6 oz. can tomato paste
  1 teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper
  1 teaspoon soy sauce
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  Minced parsley

Cut meat in very thin strips; trim off excess fat. Brown meat and
mushrooms in butter. Add onions. Combine soup, tomato paste and
seasonings; add to meat mixture. Cover; simmer for 1 hour. Just before
serving, stir in sour cream. Thicken gravy, if desired. Serve in ring of
fluffy hot rice. Garnish with parsley.


Swedish Sour Cream Meat Balls

                            Yield—5 Servings

  MEAT BALLS:
  ½ pounds ground beef
  ½ cup fine dry bread crumbs
  1 medium onion, finely chopped
  1 egg
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  1 teaspoon dry mustard
  ½ teaspoon chopped mixed herbs (thyme, oregano, sage, rosemary,
              marjoram, and basil)
  1 teaspoon paprika
  ¼ cup butter

Combine all the ingredients and mix well. Form into meat balls and brown
in butter. This will make 10 meat balls about 2 inches in diameter.
Meanwhile, prepare the sauce.

  SOUR CREAM TOMATO SAUCE:
  1½ cups water
  2 beef bouillon cubes
  1 6-oz. can tomato paste
  2 teaspoons Worcestershire sauce
  2 cups dairy sour cream

Heat the water, add beef bouillon cubes, and stir until dissolved. Add
tomato paste and Worcestershire sauce and bring to a boil. Stir in the
sour cream. Pour over meat balls and simmer for about 10 minutes or
until the sour cream is heated through. Serve alone or with noodles or
rice.


Ham Noodle Bake

                            2 qt. casserole
                            Yield—8 Servings
                    350° preheated oven, 20 minutes

  2 8-oz. packages noodles, cooked
  1 pound diced, cooked ham
  2 tablespoons chopped onion
  1 cup coffee cream
  2 cups dairy sour cream
  Salt and pepper
  Buttered bread crumbs

In a buttered 2 quart casserole put a layer of noodles and a layer of
ham. Combine onion, coffee cream and sour cream and pour ⅓ over mixture.
Season with salt and pepper. Repeat until there are 3 layers. Top with
buttered bread crumbs. Bake in a moderate oven (350°) for about 20
minutes, or until crumbs are brown.


Chicken Paprika

                           Yield—4-6 Servings

  3 to 4 tablespoons butter
  ½ cup chopped onion
  1 large frying chicken, 3 to 3½ pounds
  Paprika
  1½ teaspoons salt
  1 bayleaf, if desired
  ½ cup water
  ½ pint (1 cup) dairy sour cream

Melt butter in heavy frying pan with tight fitting cover. Add onions and
cook over very low heat until onions lose crispness. Pull onions to one
side of pan. Add chicken cut in pieces for serving and sprinkle heavily
with paprika. Cook slowly for about 5 minutes (does not need to brown).
Turn. Add more paprika until chicken is well coated. (Paprika depends
upon its color rather than its flavor for its mark of distinction.) Add
bayleaf, salt and ½ cup of water. Cover tightly. Cook very slowly for 45
minutes or until chicken is tender. To prevent sticking, add a bit of
water if necessary. Spoon the sour cream over the chicken, cover and
cook slowly 8 to 10 minutes more. Stir the cream down into the paprika
sauce. Arrange chicken on warm platter and pour sauce over all.


Veal Chops In Sour Cream

                          Covered baking dish
                            Yield—4 Servings
                          350° preheated oven

  4 lean veal chops
  2 tablespoons butter
  Salt and pepper
  4 large slices sweet onion
  ¼ cup water
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  Grated Parmesan cheese

Brown chops in butter in frying pan. Arrange in baking dish. Season to
taste with salt and pepper and place an onion slice on top of each chop.
Mix ¼ cup water with the drippings in the frying pan and pour over the
chops. Cover and bake in a 350° oven for 45 minutes. Remove the cover,
spread sour cream over the tops of the chops, sprinkle with grated
Parmesan cheese, and return to the oven uncovered for 20-30 minutes more
or until brown.


Fish Fillets In Sour Cream

                           Yield—3-4 Servings
                  10″ × 6″ × 1¾″ baking dish (1½ qts.)
                        375° oven, 20-25 minutes

  1 pound fish fillets or steaks
  Salt and pepper
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  2 tablespoons finely chopped dill pickle
  2 tablespoons minced onion
  2 tablespoons finely chopped green pepper
  1 tablespoon chopped parsley
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  ¼ teaspoon dry mustard
  ¼ teaspoon sweet basil
  Paprika

Arrange fish in a well buttered baking dish. Sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Combine remaining ingredients and spread on fish. Sprinkle with
paprika and bake in a 375° oven for 20-25 minutes or until the fish
flakes when tested with a fork.


Swiss Steak With Sour Cream Gravy

                            Yield—4 Servings

  1½ pounds round steak (thick slice)
  ¼ cup flour
  ¼ cup butter
  1½ cups water
  2 bay leaves
  2 teaspoons salt
  ½ pt (1 cup) dairy sour cream

Wipe steak with a damp cloth. Pound flour into it. Melt butter in
skillet and saute steak in this, over low heat, until browned on both
sides. Pour water over meat. Add bay leaves and salt. Cover and simmer
for 1½ hours or until the meat is tender. Remove cover and continue to
cook, allowing most of the water to evaporate. Remove steak onto hot
serving platter. Add sour cream to meat drippings in skillet and blend
well. Pour over steak and serve at once.


Lamb Stew With Sour Cream

                            Yield—4 Servings

  3 tablespoons flour
  2 teaspoons salt
  2 teaspoons paprika
  1 teaspoon pepper
  2 lb. lamb shoulder, cubed
  2 tablespoons butter
  ¼ cup chopped onion
  2 cups cooked or canned tomatoes
  1 cup dairy sour cream

Combine flour, salt, paprika and pepper. Coat the meat cubes with this
mixture. Melt butter in a 3 quart saucepan. Add meat and chopped onion
and brown lightly. Add remaining flour mixture if all was not used to
dredge the meat. Mix well. Add tomatoes. Cook over low heat for 2 hours.
Add additional tomatoes or tomato juice if necessary. Just before
serving carefully stir in the sour cream and blend well.


Sauerkraut Goulash

                            Yield—4 Servings

  2 tablespoons butter
  1 pound lean veal, cubed
  1½ teaspoons caraway seed
  1½ teaspoons dill
  1 medium onion, sliced
  1 cup water
  2 cups sauerkraut
  1 cup dairy sour cream

Melt butter and brown veal in it over low heat. Add caraway, dill, onion
and water and simmer for 2 hours. Add more water if necessary so that
the meat does not become dry. Add sauerkraut and bring to the boiling
point. Mix in sour cream and serve at once.


Stuffed Veal Birds

                            Yield—4 Servings

  4 veal steaks, cut very thin
  1¼ cups soft bread cubes
  ½ cup chopped celery
  2 teaspoons chopped onion
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  Pepper
  ⅛ teaspoon sage
  5 tablespoons butter, melted
  ½ cup milk, scalded
  3 tablespoons butter
  1 cup hot water
  2½ tablespoons flour
  1 cup dairy sour cream

Combine bread cubes, celery, onion, seasonings, melted butter and milk.
Mix well. Put 2 tablespoons of stuffing on each piece of meat. Roll;
fasten with toothpicks. Roll in flour. Brown meat in butter. Add water,
cover and simmer for 1 hour. Remove meat and take out toothpicks. Mix
flour with sour cream and add to meat gravy. Place veal birds back in
gravy and cook over low heat until gravy thickens.




                              _vegetables_


Green Beans Supreme

                       1 qt. shallow baking dish
                            Yield—4 Servings

  ⅓ cup minced onion
  2 tablespoons butter
  2 tablespoons flour
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  2 cups French style green beans, cooked, canned or frozen
  ½ cup grated sharp cheddar cheese

Simmer onion in melted butter. Add flour, salt, and pepper and mix well.
Add sour cream and heat through. Blend with cooked beans and pour into a
shallow baking dish. Top with grated cheese and bake at 350° for 15
minutes.


Sour Cream Scalloped Potatoes

                            1 qt. casserole
                            Yield—6 Servings
                    350° preheated oven, 20-25 min.

  4 cups sliced cooked potatoes
  ½ cup chopped onion
  2 tablespoons butter
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  2 tablespoons water
  2 eggs, well beaten
  1 teaspoon salt
  Dash pepper
  1 cup shredded sharp cheddar cheese

Cook potatoes in salted water until done. Saute onion in butter. Combine
with sour cream, water, eggs, salt and pepper. Place potatoes in a
buttered 1 qt. casserole. Pour sour cream sauce over them. Top with
shredded cheese and bake in a 350° oven for 20-25 minutes.


Corn In Sour Cream

                            Yield—4 Servings

  2 tablespoons butter
  ¼ cup chopped onion
  2 tablespoons chopped green pepper
  2 tablespoons flour
  2 teaspoons salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  1 cup water
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  2 cups cooked, canned or frozen corn

Saute onion and green pepper in butter in saucepan. Add flour, salt and
pepper and mix well. Add water and sour cream and stir until thickened.
Use medium heat for cooking. Add corn and stir until the corn is heated
through. Serve at once.


Baked Beets Julienne

                            1½ qt. casserole
                            Yield—6 Servings
                         350° oven, 25-30 min.

  4 cups Julienne beets, drained
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  ¼ cup beet liquid
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  2 tablespoons grated onion
  Salt and pepper
  ½ cup buttered bread crumbs

Combine all ingredients except bread crumbs and mix lightly. Turn into a
buttered 1½ quart casserole. Top with buttered crumbs. Bake at 350°
about 25-30 minutes.


Asparagus With Horseradish-Sour Cream Sauce

                            Yield—6 Servings

  2 lbs. asparagus spears or 2 boxes frozen asparagus
  ½ cup dairy sour cream
  ¼ cup drained horseradish
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  Few grains cayenne or ⅛ teaspoon paprika

Cook asparagus in a small amount of boiling salted water until tender.
Drain. Meanwhile make sauce. To sour cream add horseradish and
seasonings and blend. Serve over the cooked asparagus.




                           _salad dressings_


Pineapple Cream Dressing

                             Yield—1½ Cups

  ⅓ cup crushed pineapple, drained
  ⅓ cup pineapple syrup from canned pineapple
  2 teaspoons sugar
  ⅛ teaspoon salt
  1 cup dairy sour cream

Blend first four ingredients together. Fold in the sour cream and mix
well. Serve with fruit salad or cole slaw.


Sour Cream Dressing for Shrimp

                              Yield—1 Cup

  4 slices bacon
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  2 tablespoons tarragon vinegar
  1 teaspoon grated onion (optional)
  1 teaspoon salt

Pan-broil bacon slowly until crisp. Remove it from the pan and place on
paper towels to drain. Let bacon drippings cool. Chop bacon fine. Add
bacon drippings to sour cream, beating with a fork. Add vinegar, onion,
salt and bacon. Chill dressing thoroughly. Dressing may be kept in
refrigerator for several days in a tightly covered jar.


Sour Cream Salad Dressing

                             Yield—2¼ Cups

  3 tablespoons sugar
  3 tablespoons flour
  1 teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon white pepper
  ¼ teaspoon paprika
  1 teaspoon dry mustard
  2 eggs, slightly beaten
  ½ cup vinegar
  2 tablespoons butter
  1½ cups dairy sour cream

Mix dry ingredients. Add eggs to vinegar; add to dry ingredients. Cook
over low heat, stirring constantly until smooth and thick. Add butter;
blend. Remove from heat; stir in sour cream. Chill.


Sour Cream Dressing

  1 cup dairy sour cream
  1 tablespoon chopped chives or minced onion
  2 tablespoons vinegar (tarragon is excellent)
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon black pepper
  ¼ teaspoon sugar
  ½ cup mayonnaise or cooked salad dressing

Mix all ingredients together carefully, except mayonnaise, which is
folded in last. (Extra flavor for garlic lovers—rub clove of garlic cut
fine into salt.)




                                _salads_


California Salad

                            Yield—8 Servings

  1 cup pineapple chunks, drained
  1 cup orange segments, drained
  1 cup shredded coconut
  8 marshmallows quartered
  1 cup dairy sour cream

Combine all ingredients. Chill in refrigerator 24 hours. Serve on crisp
salad greens.


Frozen Pineapple Salad

                        Medium sized muffin tins
                       Yield—10 individual salads

  1 pint (2 cups) dairy sour cream
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  ¾ cup sugar
  ⅛ teaspoon salt
  1 9-oz. can crushed pineapple, well drained
  ¼ cup chopped maraschino cherries
  ¼ cup chopped walnuts
  1 banana, sliced

Mix sour cream, lemon juice, sugar, and salt. Add remaining ingredients
and blend. Pour into medium sized muffin tins which have been lined with
paper cups. Freeze until firm. Remove the papers to serve. This mixture
will fill 10 muffin tins.


Beet Velvet Salad

                   1 quart mold or 6 individual molds
                            Yield—6 Servings

  1 package lemon flavored gelatin
  1 cup hot water
  2 cups diced cooked beets
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  1 teaspoon grated onion
  Salt and pepper

Dissolve gelatin in hot water; stir in beets. Add sour cream and blend
well; add remaining ingredients. Pour mixture into an oiled 1 quart mold
or 6 individual molds. Chill until firm. Unmold on crisp salad greens
and serve with mayonnaise.


Potato Salad With Sour Cream Dressing

                            Yield—6 Servings

  3 cups chopped, cooked potatoes
  2 hard cooked eggs, chopped
  ½ cup chopped celery
  ⅓ cup chopped pickle
  2 teaspoons salt
  ½ teaspoon pepper
  ⅓ cup chopped onion
  ⅓ cup chopped pimento
  1 tablespoon vinegar
  1 tablespoon prepared mustard
  ¾ cup sour cream dressing

Combine all of the ingredients and chill before serving. Good for a
packed lunch when chilled in the wide-mouthed thermos bottles.


Lime Fruit Mold

                              2 quart mold
                          Yield—10-12 Servings

  2 packages lime flavored gelatin
  1½ cups hot water
  1½ cups cold water
  ⅔ cup fruit syrup
  1 cup crushed pineapple, drained
  1 cup diced canned pears, drained
  1 cup dairy sour cream

Dissolve gelatin in hot water; add cold water and fruit syrup. Chill
until partially thickened. Fold in fruits and sour cream. Pour gelatin
mixture into an oiled 2 quart mold or individual molds. Chill until
firm. Unmold on crisp salad greens and garnish with pineapple slices,
pear halves and maraschino cherries.


Lime-Lemon Layer Salad

                              2 quart mold
                          Yield—10-12 Servings

  1 package lime flavored gelatin
  1 cup hot water
  ½ cup sliced, stuffed olives
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  1 package lemon flavored gelatin
  1½ cups hot water
  ½ cup pineapple juice
  1 cup crushed pineapple, well drained
  ½ cup diced celery

Dissolve lime flavored gelatin in hot water. Chill until partially set.
Add olives; fold in sour cream. Pour into oiled salad mold or individual
salad molds, filling each one-half full. Chill until firm. Dissolve
lemon flavored gelatin in hot water; add pineapple juice. Chill until
partially set. Add crushed pineapple and celery. Pour over lime layer
and chill until firm. Unmold on crisp salad greens.


Caraway Cole Slaw

                            Yield—6 Servings

  ½ medium head cabbage, shredded (4 cups)
  ½ cup dairy sour cream
  2 tablespoons sugar
  2 tablespoons vinegar
  ½ teaspoon salt
  Dash pepper
  1-2 teaspoons caraway seed

Shred chilled cabbage. Combine remaining ingredients and pour over
cabbage. Mix lightly and serve immediately or refrigerate until ready to
serve.




                                _breads_


Sour Cream Nut Bread

                         2½ x 3½ x 7¾ inch pan
                              Yield—1 Loaf
                      350° preheated oven, 1 hour

  2 cups sifted flour
  1 teaspoon baking powder
  1 teaspoon baking soda
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon cinnamon
  ¼ teaspoon cloves
  ¼ teaspoon nutmeg
  1 egg, beaten
  1 cup brown sugar, firmly packed
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  1 cup broken nut meats

Sift flour, baking powder, soda and spices together. Beat egg. Add sugar
and mix well. Stir in sour cream carefully. Add dry ingredients,
stirring only enough to moisten them. Add the nut meats. Pour into a
well buttered loaf pan and bake in 350° preheated oven for 1 hour. Good
served warm or cold.


Pineapple Coffee Cake

                             8″ square pan
                            Yield—9 Servings
                   375° preheated oven, 25-30 minutes

  1½ cups sifted flour
  2 teaspoons baking powder
  ½ teaspoon soda
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  ¼ teaspoon nutmeg
  1 egg, beaten
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  ½ cup drained crushed pineapple
  ½ cup brown sugar, firmly packed


                                TOPPING:

  ¼ cup light corn syrup
  ½ cup chopped walnuts
  ⅓ cup shredded coconut

Sift dry ingredients together. Combine egg, sour cream, pineapple, and
brown sugar; add to dry ingredients stirring only until flour is
moistened. Brush bottom of a buttered 8-inch square pan with corn syrup;
sprinkle nuts and coconut over syrup. Spread batter over topping. Bake
at 375° for 25-30 minutes. Cut into squares and serve warm.


Prune Bread

                        9 × 5 × 3 inch loaf pan
                              Yield—1 Loaf
                      350° preheated oven, 1 hour

  2⅓ cups sifted flour
  1 teaspoon allspice
  ½ teaspoon cloves
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  1 teaspoon baking powder
  ½ teaspoon soda
  ¼ cup butter, softened
  1 cup sugar
  3 eggs
  ½ cup dairy sour cream
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  1 cup chopped, cooked prunes

Sift dry ingredients together. Cream butter and sugar, add eggs one at a
time, mixing well after each addition. Mix well. Carefully add sour
cream and vanilla and mix until smooth and well blended. Add dry
ingredients and prunes. Mix well. Pour into a buttered 9 × 5 × 3 inch
loaf pan and bake in a 350° preheated oven for 50 minutes to 1 hour.
Remove from the pan when done and cool on a cake rack.




                           _sandwich spreads_


Tuna Sour Cream Sandwich Filling

                             Yield—1¼ Cups

  1 7-oz. can tuna fish, flaked
  ¼ cup chopped celery
  2 tablespoons minced onion
  2 tablespoons pickle relish
  6 tablespoons dairy sour cream

Combine ingredients and mix well. Use as a sandwich filling or a spread
for crackers.


Cheese and Pickle Sandwich Spread

                              Yield—1 Cup

  3 tablespoons pickle relish
  1 cup shredded sharp cheddar cheese
  ¼ cup dairy sour cream

Combine all ingredients and mix well. Use as a spread for sandwiches or
crackers.




                               _desserts_


Frozen Cheese and Strawberry Dessert

                            Yield—4 Servings

  1 cup cottage cheese
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  ½ cup sugar
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  1 pint strawberries, crushed and sweetened

Put cottage cheese through food mill. Add lemon juice and sugar and beat
smooth. Add sour cream and mix well. Freeze in a refrigerator tray until
firm around the edges then turn into a chilled bowl and beat until
smooth. Return to tray and freeze firm. Serve in squares with fresh
sweetened berries or defrosted frozen ones. Raspberries, blueberries or
sliced peaches may be used if desired.


Pineapple Apricot Refrigerator Cheese Cake

                         8-inch spring form pan
                          Yield—8-10 Servings

  1 9-oz. can crushed pineapple
  1 1-lb. (No. 303) can apricot halves
  1¼ teaspoons salt
  2 cups sieved cottage cheese (cream style)
  2 tablespoons plain gelatin
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  1 cup liquid (juice from canned fruit with water added to make 1 cup)
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  1 cup whipping cream
  ¼ cup sugar
  ½ cup graham cracker crumbs
  3 tablespoons melted butter
  3 tablespoons finely chopped nuts

Sieve apricot halves and pineapple. Add salt and sieved cottage cheese
and mix well. Dissolve the gelatin in the lemon juice. Heat the fruit
juice to boiling and pour over the gelatin. Stir until gelatin is
dissolved. Cool slightly. Gradually add to cheese mixture and blend
thoroughly. Add sour cream. Whip cream and add sugar. Fold into cheese
mixture. Pour into an 8-inch spring form pan and chill several hours.
Unmold on plate. Mix crumbs, butter, and chopped nuts and sprinkle over
top of cake. Garnish with fresh or canned apricot halves.


Simple, Yet Simply Delicious Sauce

     Cool, canned purple plums with a splash of sour cream on top.


Sour Cream and Apricot Dessert Sauce

                           Yield—2 Cups Sauce

  1 cup dried apricots
  1½ cups water
  1 cup sugar
  ⅛ teaspoon salt
  ¾ cup dairy sour cream

Simmer apricots in water until tender. Press through sieve or food mill.
Add the sugar and salt to the hot apricot puree and stir until
dissolved. Cool. Stir in the sour cream. Serve over ice cream, waffles,
or French dessert pancakes.




                                _cakes_


Spicy Cream Cake

                        2 8-inch layer cake pans
                    350° preheated oven, 30 minutes

  ½ cup butter
  2 cups brown sugar, firmly packed
  3 eggs yolks, slightly beaten
  2 cups sifted cake flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon baking soda
  2 teaspoons cinnamon
  ¼ teaspoon cloves
  ½ teaspoon allspice
  ½ teaspoon nutmeg
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  3 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Cream butter, add sugar and beat until light and fluffy. Add egg yolks
and mix thoroughly. Sift dry ingredients and add alternately with sour
cream, mixing well after each addition. Fold egg whites into batter.
Pour into two buttered and floured 8-inch layer cake pans. Bake at 350°
for 30 minutes.


Chocolate Cream Cake

                        3 8-inch layer cake pans
                   350° preheated oven, 25-30 minutes

  6 tablespoons butter
  1½ cups sugar
  2 eggs, beaten
  3 1-ounce squares unsweetened chocolate
  ¾ cup boiling water
  1½ teaspoons soda
  2¼ cups sifted cake flour
  1½ teaspoons baking powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¾ cup dairy sour cream
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Cream butter; gradually add sugar and continue creaming until fluffy.
Add beaten eggs. Melt chocolate with water; cool. Add sifted dry
ingredients alternately with sour cream, mixing well after each
addition. Stir in chocolate mixture and vanilla. Pour batter into 3
buttered and floured 8-inch cake pans. Bake at 350° for 25-30 minutes.


Mahogany Sour Cream Cake

                        2 9-inch round cake pans
                    350° preheated oven, 30-35 min.

  3 squares baking chocolate
  ½ cup water
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  2 cups sifted cake flour
  1 teaspoon soda
  1 teaspoon salt
  1½ teaspoons baking powder
  ⅔ cup butter
  ⅔ cup light brown sugar
  1 cup granulated sugar
  3 eggs
  2 teaspoons vanilla

Cook chocolate and water over very low heat, stirring until blended.
Cool and add sour cream, mixing well. Sift dry ingredients together.
Cream butter and add brown sugar and granulated sugar. Add eggs one at a
time, mixing well after each addition. Add vanilla and beat. Add dry
ingredients alternately with the sour cream mixture. Mix well. Pour
batter into 2 buttered and floured 9-inch round layer cake pans and bake
in a 350° oven for 30-35 minutes. Remove from pans and cool on cake
racks. Or bake one 9 x 13 inch loaf cake and use a 350° oven for 40
minutes.




                               _cookies_


Sour Cream Date Delights

                          Yield—5 Doz. Cookies
                    400° preheated oven, 10 minutes

  1¼ cup sifted flour
  ½ teaspoon soda
  ¼ teaspoon baking powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon cinnamon
  ⅛ teaspoon nutmeg
  ¼ cup butter
  ¾ cup brown sugar, firmly packed
  1 egg
  ½ teaspoon vanilla
  ½ cup dairy sour cream
  ⅔ cup chopped pitted dates
  ½ cup chopped nuts

Sift flour with dry ingredients. Cream butter and sugar; add egg and
vanilla and mix well. Add sifted dry ingredients alternately with sour
cream. Fold in chopped dates and nuts. Drop by teaspoonfuls on a greased
cookie sheet and bake in a 400° oven for 10-12 minutes.


Sour Cream Oatmeal Cookies

                         Yield—4-5 Doz. Cookies
                   425° preheated oven, 8-10 minutes

  1¼ cups sifted flour
  1 teaspoon baking powder
  ¼ teaspoon soda
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon nutmeg
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  ¼ cup butter
  1 cup firmly packed light brown sugar
  1 egg
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  ½ cup dairy sour cream
  ½ cup chopped raisins
  ½ cup chopped nuts
  ⅔ cup quick cooking oatmeal

Sift dry ingredients together. Cream butter and sugar, add egg and
blend. Add vanilla. Add sifted dry ingredients alternately with sour
cream. Lastly fold in raisins, nuts, and oatmeal. Drop by teaspoonfuls
onto a greased cooky sheet and bake in a 425° oven for 8-10 minutes.
Remove from cooky sheet and cool on cake racks.


Chocolate Chip Cream Cookies

                         Yield—7-8 Doz. Cookies
                   375° preheated oven, 10-12 minutes

  2½ cups flour
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon baking powder
  1 teaspoon soda
  ½ cup butter
  1½ cups dark brown sugar
  2 eggs
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  1 cup chopped nuts
  2 6-oz. packages semi-sweet chocolate bits

Sift dry ingredients together. Cream butter and sugar. Add eggs and
vanilla and mix well. Add sifted dry ingredients alternately with sour
cream. Add chopped nuts and chocolate and blend. Drop by teaspoonfuls on
a greased cooky sheet and bake in a 375° oven for 10 minutes or until
browned. Remove from cooky sheet at once and cool on cake racks.


Chocolate Cream Drops

                      Yield—Approx. 5 Doz. Cookies
                    375° preheated oven, 10 minutes

  ½ cup butter
  2 1-ounce squares unsweetened chocolate, melted
  1½ cups sugar
  2 eggs
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  2¾ cups sifted flour
  ½ teaspoon soda
  ½ teaspoon baking powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 cup chopped nuts

Cream butter and add chocolate. Gradually add sugar. Beat in eggs, one
at a time; then add sour cream and vanilla. Sift flour, soda, baking
powder and salt; gradually add to mixture. Add nuts. Chill at least 1
hour. Drop rounded teaspoonfuls about 2″ apart on lightly greased cooky
sheet. Bake at 375° for 10 minutes.




                               _candies_


Cream Candied Nuts

                       Yield—About 1⅛ lbs. Nuts.

  1½ cups sugar
  ½ cup dairy sour cream
  2 tablespoons butter
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  2½ cups pecan halves

In a 2 quart saucepan, bring sugar, sour cream, and butter to a boil.
Cook to soft ball stage, 238° F., stirring occasionally. Remove from
heat and add vanilla and cinnamon. Stir until mixture begins to thicken.
Add nuts and stir until well coated. Turn out onto buttered cooky sheet
and separate into individual clusters.


Chocolate Sour Cream Fudge

                           8-inch square pan

  2 cups sugar
  1 cup dairy sour cream
  2 oz. (2 sq.) unsweetened chocolate
  ½ teaspoon salt
  2 tablespoons light corn syrup
  2 tablespoons butter
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  ½ cup chopped walnuts

Combine sugar, sour cream, broken chocolate, salt, and syrup in 2 quart
saucepan. Cook over low heat, stirring until sugar dissolves. Heat to
boiling; cover, and cook for 3 minutes. Uncover and cook to the soft
ball stage, 238°, stirring frequently. Remove from heat. Add butter and
vanilla; let cool to lukewarm, 110°, without stirring. Beat vigorously
until the candy is creamy and has lost its gloss. Add walnuts and pour
into buttered pan. Cut in squares.

    [Illustration: Lucerne Products]




                    _You’ll love_ Lucerne Sour Cream


Look for these Other Fine Lucerne Dairy Products At Your Safeway
Store—All Safeway Guaranteed.

  A Finer Milk that saves your money
  Old Style Farm Churned Flavor
  Perfect for Calorie Counters
  Delicious Hot or Cold—Kids Love it
  For Coffee, Cereal, Fruit or Berries
  To top your best, There’s Nothing Finer




                  _You’ll love_ Lucerne Dairy Products




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 50 WONDERFUL WAYS TO USE LUCERNE SOUR CREAM, FROM APPETIZERS TO DESSERTS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.