AGAINST TETRARCH

By A. A. O. Gilmour

On that evil planet, broken men who had once trod Earth
knew only two things for sure. One, they all were dying at
twenty-five. Two, lovely Mona Darlanan was a dirty traitor.

[Transcriber’s Note: This etext was produced from
Planet Stories Fall 1947.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Rod Harrow pawed futilely at the whirling sands in the gryxon mines on
Tetrarch IV. Dimly, as through a dark mist, he could see the line of
bobbing lamps that etched the tunnel outlines. He raised his pick for
another weary stroke, when he noticed the slave next to him. The poor
devil’s face was ghastly under its close-fitting helmet. It was deeply
lined, worn--and old. Rod saw his twisted grin when the man crumpled
against the rocky abutment. A despairing cackle pierced his audiphones:

“_I was twenty-five yesterday. I’ll be glad to die!_”

Rod eased him as he slid to the tunnel floor. He watched in bitter
helplessness while the stricken fingers worked their way toward glazing
eyes. Dribbles of foam spattered the inside of the man’s helmet. Pity
and a driving desire for vengeance struggled in Rod’s mind when the
slave’s feeble shout died away. The doomed man’s feet beat a weak
tattoo on the sandy floor. The beat quickened spasmodically--and
stopped.

Smoke issued from the inert nostrils. It clouded the froth-filled
helmet. Hazily, the dead face took on a greenish glow. It glimmered
like a crucified Satan for a moment, and then fell away to dry embers.

An eerie glow flashed. Rod knew, after only a day in the mines,
that the tetrarchian guards were now on their way. Black-browed and
huge--with their curiously similar features--they came to drag away the
corpse.

A sniveling slave on Rod’s left stopped to watch them. A guard turned
and raised his weapon suggestively. The sniveler bent to his digging
with renewed vigor.

When the tetrarchs had gone another slave slipped in to take the place
left vacant by the dead man.

Rod winced in the act of lifting his pick. The gash he had taken in
his arm before he was captured on Earth was far from healed. He saw
then that the new slave was a woman. She was young and slender. Her
hair was glowing gold in the dim lit tunnel. Under her broad forehead
her eyes were an unfathomable grey.

“Mona Darlanan!” he breathed in wonderment.

Even in the mines--in the serfdom of Tetrarch--her beauty caught him.
This was the girl who would always make him uncomfortable ... as it had
back in the old days--when Earth was free. She had gone on the stage.
He had buried himself in a science laboratory. They had lost touch.
When the tetrarchs overran Earth he had lost all knowledge of her.
Besides, he had been busy ... busy on the most important project of
Earth’s Thirtieth Century A.D.

“How long have you been here?” he asked. He felt awkward. This was not
the way he had pictured their meeting.

“I’ve been in the mines longer than you have.” Her face was quiet,
almost submissive. “Don’t talk, or the guards will be back. Besides, I
want to change places with you.”

“Why? Does it make any difference?”

“Yes.” She brushed him aside impatiently and turned to the sniveling
youth at his side.

“Are you all right?” she asked anxiously.

“They almost killed me,” the whimpering slave was trembling.

“Oh, Jerry!”

“I hope we win them over.”

“I know now that’s the only way.” The girl looked about her furtively,
“I’ve been talking to Latham Koler....”

Rod swung his pick with a vicious twist and unearthed a red cloud of
Mercury oxide. His reaction boiled like the crimson dust as it mingled
with the swirling sand in the tunnel. When he’d gotten control of
himself he spoke flatly.

“A man just died here,” he said. “Don’t taint his death with a
traitor’s name.”

“Latham Koler’s not a traitor!” the girl flashed. “At least he has
enough influence to get some of us out of the mines.”

Rod eyed her angrily. The memory of the human torch ripped words from
him.

“We’re humans! Remember? From Earth! There was a time when a human from
Earth would prefer dying to licking a conqueror’s boots!”

Mona shrugged her shoulders. She swung a pick on a gryxon outcropping.
“That may be,” she said briefly, “but we’re slaves now. And we die
within a day or so of our twenty-fifth birthday. If Latham Koler can
get Jerry out of the mines,” Mona indicated the youth by her side,
“I’ll mention his name--I’ll do anything--if Jerry can be saved.”

Jerry patted her shoulder. “He’ll help us, I know,” he soothed.

Rod Harrow bent to wisp sandy ice from a blob of red oxide. He put the
crimson dust into his pocket.

“You’ll be in the slave compartment tonight?” he asked.

The girl turned to her work. “There’s no place else except the sleeping
cubicles. I suppose I’ll be there. When will you be twenty-five?” she
asked abruptly.

“One month from today.”

“I don’t see why ...” Mona’s voice died away as the guards worked
their way down the tunnel. They were herding the humans back to the
slave compartment for the night.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rod Harrow entered the compartment for the first time. He was one of
the last on Earth to be captured and sent on the slave ship to Tetrarch
IV. His eyes were narrow, waiting for the first sign of inevitable
recognition.

He had divested himself of his tight, transparent space suit. Heated
space suits were necessary on Tetrarch IV, except in the compartments
assigned to human slaves. In them there was air and heat. The planet
itself was bitterly cold. Its only atmosphere was inert Krypton which
the tetrarchians breathe. Through this dead gas activated sand coursed
in eternal swirls.

Slaves were pouring through the door in droves. There were no oldsters
in this crowd. None over twenty-five. Earth’s two hundred year life
span had been considerably reduced.

A hard-thewed, ice-eyed youngster recognized him first. Steel fingers
closed on Rod’s wrist.

“Rod Harrow!” he whispered. “I’m Don Rickter. I thought you were
holding out on Earth.”

Rod kept his eyes on a card game that had started. “I left our hideaway
in the Rockies when I found out how I could help up here. There was no
way of getting here except by the slave route.” He paused thoughtfully.
“We haven’t been idle on Earth--the few of us that are left.”

“But, man!” Rickter was dubious. “We’re trapped here. Right now those
devils are watching us. We can’t even talk, but that they know about
it. Sometimes even before we say anything. I swear they can read our
thoughts.”

“It’s not quite as bad as that. How about getting some of our old gang
together for a game of cards?”

“Just as you say, Rod. But it won’t do any good to talk business.”

Rod grinned. “Remember the game we all played when we were kids?” He
emphasized his remark with a quick gesture.

Rickter’s answering grin was sufficient response. “I remember,” he said.

“There’s a grey-eyed girl around here. Name’s Mona.”

“Oh, Mona Darlanan. She’s hipped on getting that adopted brother of
hers out of the mines. The Lord knows why! He’s a cowardly little
wretch.”

“Better keep her from kibitzing if you can. She might have played the
same game ... and I don’t think she can be trusted.”

The first hand had hardly been dealt when Rod threw his cards down and
called for a new deck. He emphasized his dissatisfaction by shaking his
hand with index finger outstretched, middle finger and thumb conjoined.
Then he clenched his fist and shook it at the intent players first
with the thumb down and then with the thumb up. His fingers stretched
heaven-ward, except for the index finger when he swore the deck they
were using was too dirty.

Don Rickter looked up in mock disgust. The icy glint in his eyes
deepened. Rod centered his displeasure on him. After a slight pause,
Rickter argued back. His own gestures were just as aggressive. Soon all
of them joined in. The chatter continued, hand after hand, but the real
discussion remained in the deaf and dumb sign language--the game all of
them had played on Earth before Earth succumbed to the tetrarchs.

“I let myself get caught,” Rod commenced, “because of a note smuggled
through to me on a tetrarchian space ship.”

“Sounds like a trap.” Rickter was succinct. “We couldn’t get a message
out from here.”

“I don’t think it came from here.” Rod was equally terse. “I think it
came from the survivors of the Hunt.”

“What!” Rickter almost forgot to use his hands. “There can’t be any
survivors.”

“But there are,” Rod insisted. “They’ve learned how to live on Tetrarch
IV even when the oxygen in their space suits is exhausted.”

At this point a rustling was heard among the gathering kibitzers. The
crowd was drawing back in sullen anger while a tall, black-robed,
cadaverous personage forced his way through.

“I’m Latham Koler,” he announced, “I understand Rod Harrow is here.”

Rod pushed his chair back. Silence settled over the crowd. It was
broken suddenly by a scuffle in the far corner of the compartment. A
golden-haired girl struggled in the arms of a slave who tried vainly to
clamp his hand over her mouth.

“He’s here all right.” Mona Darlanan’s disheveled hair fell over her
shoulders. She pushed the slave from her and struck him sharply. Her
clear voice shattered the quiet.

“He’s here. And he’s plotting rebellion. I just realized they’ve been
talking to each other in sign language!”

       *       *       *       *       *

The walls of the slave compartment seemed to glow with thousands of
almost microscopic specks of violet light. A scant moment later the
door to the compartment burst open and the guards entered. They marched
with beautiful precision, calmly, impassively.

Rod watched them as he rose from his chair. He took quick note of the
masks they wore to protect themselves from the air and then he launched
himself head first.

His skull landed with a satisfying plunk in the middle of the first
guard’s stomach. His reaching arms clasped the tetrarchian’s legs just
below the knees and the tetrarchian landed on the floor--hard. He
slipped the guard’s blaster from its holster on the way down, knocked
the tetrarchian mask loose and rolled to meet the next attacker. His
turn was just in time to miss a pair of boots--lead-heeled--that were
jamming down on his head. As he twisted, Rod saw another boot. It was
coming toward him in the full arc of a fast kick. Rod caught it and
twisted. He was slightly surprised when the ankle turned a full three
hundred and sixty degrees. The guard fell heavily.

He’d gotten to his feet, blaster in hand, when they rushed him. With
a savage grin, Rod let go. It was good to put electronic slugs in the
advancing guards. A small return payment for the slave who had glowed
to his death! Rod wasn’t sure but what his eyes were playing him
tricks. He swore the guard was still coming at him. The one with the
hole in him! Only the unmasked tetrarch was inert on the floor.

He aimed carefully and let go again. The guard was still coming. The
lights went out entirely. Rod blasted four times in quick succession,
then jumped and twisted sidewise to the floor. As a feint it did him
little good. The guards were up, on him--including the one with five
holes in his carcass. Rod was held in a vise-like grip while they
kicked the blaster out of his hand and zipped a space suit over his
frame.

As he was hustled out of the compartment he heard Rickter’s voice. “I’m
sorry, Rod. But I guess it’s useless--and I couldn’t have helped you.
I’ll be twenty-five next month!”

“I’ll be twenty-five myself,” Rod yelled back. “We’ll have a swell
birthday party.”

The last sound he heard was Mona’s hysterical laughter.

The heavy door closed softly and Rod found himself in the stinging sand
of outside Tetrarch. But only for a moment. The guards took off their
masks with obvious relief and guided him to a small building some
fifty yards from the slave compartment.

He was thrust through a circular aperture and turned to see himself
viewed by an elderly tetrarch. It spoke with the peculiar sibilance
with which the tetrarchians handled human speech.

“You are a rassh yonge manss, Ross Harros. Howefser, there iss
ssomething I musst ssay to you. With no one elsse of my rasce pressent.”

A door back of the tetrarch opened silently. Latham Koler slid
noiselessly through the opening. Rod scowled into the quisling’s
peering owl-eyes. It was an effort to resist the impulse to cover both
of them with a left jab before crossing his right on the bony chin.

“I’m sorry our helmets keep me from spitting in your face,” he remarked.

The tetrarch motioned Koler forward.

“You are not as mature as I expected.” Koler’s voice rustled like his
dark garments, “And your wits need more exercise. You’d be quarry for
the Hunt at this moment, if I hadn’t interceded on your behalf.”

“Quarry?” Rod’s eyebrows raised.

“Yes. Every so often one of the hot-heads decides to escape. The
tetrarchs love it. Sometimes, they deliberately give them the chance.”

       *       *       *       *       *

He pointed to the oxygen cannisters attached to the back of Rod’s space
suit. “The cylinders in our human space suits supply enough air to last
for eight hours. When the air is exhausted it seems to be a natural
reaction to rip the suit open.

“Imagine breathing this stuff!” Koler grasped a handful of the sand
swirling about them. “That’s the climax of the Hunt. We--uh--they allow
about an hour’s head start and then stalk the quarry. The idea is to
catch him just as he rips his suit. And to get him to the operating
chamber just before he dies.

“The tetrarchs are brilliant technicians, even if they are weak on
theory. So I’ve helped them. We are anxious to find out why humans
exposed to gryxon die on their twenty-fifth birthday. They think
research on still-living humans will give them the answer.”

The tetrarch waved an arm. “He is a good sscientisst,” he commented.

Koler’s rustling voice paused while the owl-eyes continued to peer.
“But that’s of minor interest. I’ve persuaded them to save you.”

“Why?”

“You have influence.” Latham Koler’s voice rustled while the tetrarch
nodded approvingly. “We are well aware you were President of the Terran
Science Association. And that you served in the terran army with
distinction in the fruitless fight against the tetrarchs. And we know
that you have thousands of devoted followers.”

Koler paused. He peered with bloodshot eyes to see if his remarks were
taking effect. “The tetrarchs are anxious to expand their conquests.
They need those that are spending their time guarding the humans now.
If you will throw in with us--the rest will follow....”

“As slaves! With time hanging a glowing torch over our heads! Try
another tack, Koler.”

The bitter anguish in Rod’s voice tightened the skin on the traitor’s
cadaverous skull. Unconsciously, he stepped back before Rod’s
overwhelming fury.

“Some day we’ll rid ourselves of the tetrarchs. The time will come when
Earth again will be free. When it comes, Koler, kill yourself. At least
you’ll have your choice of the various kinds of death.”

Koler peered doubtfully at the tetrarch who nodded and walked to the
aperture. A guard stood at attention.

“Bring the sslave, Mona Darlanan,” the tetrarch commanded.

[Illustration: “_Bring the slave, Mona Darlanan!_”]

When she entered Rod faced her impassively. “You’ve turned traitor too,
I see.”

The girl faced him. She looked remote and submissive, but somehow
untouched. Her hand sought unconsciously to brush back the heavy golden
hair under the confines of her helmet.

“I have a brother,” she said simply, “the baby of our family. We’re all
that’s left. My parents adopted him to look after him. I’ve taken over.”

“Sslave Darlanan,” the tetrarch interrupted, “we wissh you to convinsce
Ross Harros of the sstupidity of further resisstansce.”

“If you do,” Koler’s voice rustled, “perhaps Jerry--your brother--can
be put to work in the compartment instead of the mines.”

Mona turned her breath-taking beauty on Rod. Her eyes glowed with
passionate conviction. “Don’t you see,” she said softly, “we only make
things worse by resisting? The tetrarchs want more slaves. Let them get
them--from other planets--other galaxies. If we help them perhaps they
will send us back to Earth. You’ve _got_ to understand.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Before her his reason was powerless. Unconsciously, his arms encircled
her waist. He couldn’t bring himself to fight her.

She dropped her head on his chest. Then she raised her eyes, “You will
help--with you and Latham Koler in the confidence of the tetrarchs....”

The spell was destroyed. Rod stiffened. “Not Koler!” He grasped her by
the wrists and thrust her away. “Koler!” His voice deepened in contempt.

“We knew him on Earth before these slave-makers lulled us into a false
sense of security with their friendship and their gadgets. Koler never
amounted to anything then. He was always on the fringe of things. Here,
he’s venting his spite on the few of us that are left--and he’s gotten
that opportunity by toadying to these lousy, so-called powers.”

“No sso fasst,” the tetrarch put out a restraining arm. “We are simply
following the desstiny by ensslaving you. Our rasce iss to be the
overlords of all the galassies. You can have a sshare if you wissh.”

“I can see your point though,” Rod ignored the tetrarch to face Mona,
“but don’t you see there are some things more important than your
brother--that in spite of him--you can’t turn traitor?

“Do you remember, Mona, how the tetrarchs first came to Earth--how
friendly they were and how they loaded us with those amazing
labor-eliminating gadgets? Press a button and everything was
done--power for our gyros, heat for our buildings, force for our
machines--anything and everything. With all our work eliminated we lost
our watchfulness. They never let us know what powered the gadgets--we
never knew about gryxon power until the tetrarchs took over.

“We found out about gryxon then--in the mines. Once it’s sheathed by
radium and the radium sheathed with lead--it’s harmless. But--when
human life is used to handle the raw ore--!”

The vibrant timbre of Rod’s voice seemed to die away to death’s
whisper, “Well, we all expect to die when we’re twenty-five ... and
time’s passing. Try weighing what you might loosely call the human race
against one brother!

“And as for you--” Rod stepped forward quickly and slammed his fist
against the air tank attached to Koler’s space suit. He wrenched it
loose and threw it away. Not waiting to see the result, he stepped out
of the aperture and gave the guard the same treatment.

He raced through the city, wondering why he was not pursued. Then it
came to him. There would be a Hunt.

As he ran across rocky ground he wondered how Koler was taking to a
silica diet.

His course was hazily sketched in his mind. The smuggled note that had
started him from Earth had not been too specific. It couldn’t have
been. There was too much chance of its being intercepted. But he had
a good working knowledge of Tetrarch’s surface. The problem was to
get to the Survivors--those who had somehow escaped the gryxon mines
and escaped the hunting tetrarchians--and in getting to them he had
to throw his pursuers off the trail. There was a test in this, he was
sure. He thought he had certain clues to that.

Why, for instance, did a tetrarch with a slug in him keep on fighting?
Why did the unearthly glow precede the coming of the guards? He felt he
ought to be glad about that eerie flash. It was a warning--something
like a rattlesnake’s.

His course led him to rocky foothills. He had skirted them when another
gnawing thought came. When did Mona adopt a brother? He’d never known
of one. He shrugged the thought aside. He was coming to a broad pass.
He kept his course straight, for it was still dark. When dawn came he
would seek cover--or did darkness mean anything to the tetrarchians? It
probably didn’t.

He covered the pass and worked his way up the far right of three
towering mountains. It was cold--colder even than the bitter keenness
of the level lands. He notched the heating element in his suit to
the top position and continued his climb. In the deep darkness that
preceded dawn he felt his way along the edge of narrow, jagged ravines.
The swirling sands made sight impossible. His progress became slower.

He had reached almost to the top when dawn glimmered over the horizon.
Far down over the rocky crags intermittent flashes glowed. Rod sat back
on his haunches and watched their approach.

In the dawn’s half-light the glowing lights dimmed but he was able to
mark their progress. Assuming their current speed and allowing for
lost trails and going off course, they would overtake him in about two
hours--if he continued at his past speed. They had established a nice
calculation--precisely balanced to catch him at the moment his air
supply hit zero.

He would soon be fair bait for the operating room.

He watched the flaring lights more intently. As they swarmed over the
foothills they seemed to lose some of their capacity for glimmering.
Rod nodded comprehension and turned to clamber up the almost vertical
slope.

It was hard going and he was in plain view by the time he reached the
top. Up here the shifting sand was finer. There was less of it, and it
hugged the ground more closely than in the lowlands.

Another hour passed before the flames sensed him. They were working
toward him but more slowly. They had lost all semblance of glimmer and
had taken on the aspects of a solid sheet, of flame. Rod glanced back
and noted there was no sign of any figures following the flashes. He
nodded decisively.

The facts had fallen into a definite pattern!

       *       *       *       *       *

Before him stretched a plateau, rock-strewn and sand-swept. Beyond it,
the topmost peak of the range towered to challenge the pale tetrarchian
sun. Rod checked his air supply. There was just enough to get him
across the plateau.

He examined the heating element in his suit more carefully and probed
an exploratory finger across the pocket over his short ribs. The
package was still there. The gash under his arm was bothering him
again. Well and good! Maybe there would be a chance for it to heal
properly if he ever won through.

He started across the plateau at a fast trot.

He glanced back at first. But after an hour’s steady progress there was
no need to. He knew the flames were gaining on him. His breathing was
thick and labored. The air gauge in his suit was oscillating at zero.
As he slowed the pursuing flames speeded forward. One shot ahead of the
rest and circled over him like a gleam-buzzard. It watched him stagger
while it poised motionless. Then it swooped.

It darted toward him. He paused and swung an almost drunken punch at
it. His fist went through it and he recoiled, stricken at the terrific
shock that traveled along his arm. The flame retreated sullenly to
continue circling.

He drew a deep breath and held it. The peak wavered before him. It was
close now. His head throbbed and the gash in his arm had opened. Warm
blood was seeping through his sleeve. His leaden feet refused to go
further. He fell to his knees and crawled toward the base of the peak.
Sobbing, each breath a burning hell, he worked his way over the last
few yards. He reached the rocky slope and scrambled up crabwise until
he collapsed.

The hovering flames paused. They reached glowing tentacles toward him
while he ripped frantically at his cloying, confining space suit.

He rolled over on his back when the fastenings gave way. The flames
huddled closer in the intense cold of the upper slope when Rod shorted
the heating element. It glowed white while he ripped his pocket in a
desperate search for red dust--red oxide from the gryxon mines.

His face was blue when he dropped the dust on the white hot heat coil.
The red dust changed to gleaming droplets of mercury. Oxygen--rich pure
oxygen was released in the change. He breathed the life-giving fumes
through pinched nostrils.

When strength came pouring back into his air-starved system he advanced
on the weakened flames. They hugged the rocks--inert in the savage
cold of the mountain. Some of them had changed to glowing liquid.
One, higher on the slope than the rest, had frozen to an opalescent
solid. When the newly generated oxygen flowed over them they exploded
harmlessly to grey powder. As the last one disappeared Rod turned to
face a grinning, space-clad figure.

“Nice work, Rod,” the figure called, “I see you answer your mail.”

“Bill Williamson!” Rod grinned his relief. “Oblige me, pal, by not
writing any more notes.”

Williamson was beside him. He slipped a fresh cannister of air into
place on Rod’s space suit and supported him while they clambered
further up the mountain-side.

“That oxygen trick!” he exulted. “That’s a nice wrinkle! They sounded
like popcorn going off.”

Williamson led him to a cave entrance buried deep in a gorge. The
concealed opening was covered with a heavy wind-proofed canvas. They
entered through the double fold.

“Oxygen equipped!” Rod stared his surprise.

“We have our creature comforts.” Williamson unlatched his helmet.
“Crude but effective. We’ve been heating mercury oxide. There’s lots of
it around. Set awhile--while I call the gang. They’ll be glad to see
you.”

When the handshaking was over, Rod faced the hardbitten, sand-burned
Survivors. These were the men who, like himself, had come through the
testing. They had found the way to live on this planet--in the teeth
of the conquerors of Earth. Now they needed him--needed his genius
to guide them along the path to freedom--to conquest over the hated
tetrarchs.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rod looked at the intent faces about him. “First,” he said, “I want the
answers to some questions. I’ve figured part of it out myself--check me
if I go wrong.

“The Tetrarchs are not human in shape. They’re really flame-like
gobs of energy--probably phosphoric in nature. For some reason, they
fashioned plastic bodies which resembled human figures. They have
always used these bodies in their dealings with humans--unless they’re
hunting.”

Williamson nodded approvingly. “We stole a few of those imitation
bodies. They’re all pretty much the same, except for the masks.
The ones they use on Earth are built in. Here in Tetrarch they’re
removable. They fashioned them to conceal their real structure after
they investigated Earth. We humans never knew of them until they made
their appearance in camouflage. They studied us first, devised the body
and then established relations.”

“Yeah,” a Survivor interrupted, “When they took us in, they took us
over--but good! They couldn’t have done it any other way--with their
one lousy town on a two-bit planet.”

“Under normal temperature conditions,” Rod continued, “they’re gaseous.
As it gets colder they become less active and then they turn to liquid.”

“That’s right, chief, and when it gets really cold,” another Survivor
added, “they turn to solid. When we win this fight I’m going to get me
a tetrarch, freeze it, and use it for a light in my fishing lodge.”

“Oh no, you’re not,” a barrel-chested earthman, incongruously named
Bunny, informed him, “you’re going to contribute it to help spell Mona
Darlanan’s name in lights on Broadway.”

“What’ that again?” Rod’s tone had sharpened.

“Mona Darlanan, boss. She’s the greatest actress of them all--bar
none.” Bunny grinned disarmingly. “Bet you didn’t know you was her
messenger boy.”

“That’s right, Rod.” Bill Williamson picked up Rod’s discarded space
suit. “Here,” he suppressed a smile with difficulty, “she’s put a note
on your helmet latching. It’s in code and says she expects to get
called in to start you on your way.”

There was no stopping Williamson’s laughter, “Look! It says here she’s
known you a long time and you’re an old sober-sides. She expects to hug
you before you start out and she hopes you’ll like it.”

“Nice goin’, chief. She didn’t hug me.” Bunny was glum on this point.

“Wait a minute, guys.” Rod silenced the laughter. “You’re all wrong.
That girl betrayed me--she’s gone over to the tetrarchs--lock, stock
and barrel.”

“Let’s hear about it, Rod.” Williamson was intent.

Rod recounted briefly what had happened when Mona Darlanan had read his
sign language.

When he was through, Bill Williamson was silent for a long moment. Then
he spoke slowly, “Rod, you’re the only one who ever arrived on Tetrarch
knowing of our existence. As a matter of fact, Mona was responsible
for smuggling that note aboard the space ship--the one that brought
you here. You came close to giving the whole show away with your sign
language gag. Mona Darlanan was smart enough to realize that and she
took the one sure way to get you on your way to us.”

“I don’t catch.” Rod Harrow’s face was a study in bewilderment.

“I’m not surprised.” Williamson was half smiling. “Mona does that to
guys. We first got in touch with her when one of the boys--he’s gone
the glowing way now--used one of our captured humanoid suits and made
like a guard. We selected Mona as our contact because she’s completely
and utterly loyal. And she’s probably the finest actress there is.

“To get herself solid with the tetrarchs she ‘adopted’ that little
jerk, Jerry Wilson. That was to convince them that she was sincere.”

Rod, listening intently, nodded--he understood the why of that gnawing
thought back on the lowlands now.

“She keeps us informed of what the tetrarchs are planning--and she’s
got them hoodwinked--particularly that rat, Latham Koler.

“Guys are always trying to escape from the mines. Sometimes they
survive. When they do there’s always some message from her. When they
go she tells them how to get to us. But they have to promise to destroy
the note if it looks as though they won’t get through.”

“She didn’t say anything like that to me,” Rod flared.

“She had faith in you,” Williamson said shortly, “besides she knew you
knew.”

“If you say so, Bill. I admit I missed the boat.” Rod’s thoughts were
veering crazily.

“But to get back to business, Rod,” Bill Williamson said, “I don’t know
how long we’re going to be safe here. Our one lucky string is the
tetrarch’s principle of the Hunt.”

“I was going to ask you about that.” Rod was now alert. “Why don’t the
tetrarchs account for every human that escaped?”

“Well, boss,” the barrel-chested Bunny spoke, “they figure, how
can they lose? All of us are due for the torch parade once we hit
twenty-five.”

“Further,” Williamson added, “from the info I’ve gotten from Mona,
the tetrarchs use the Hunt to test themselves. For each quarry caught
without aid of any kind a tetrarchian guard gets promoted. If the
guard himself is overcome--on his home field--so to speak--the idea
is they’re well rid of him. That means a constant process of self
selection.... And it leaves us facing highly dangerous adversaries.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The canvas covering the cave entrance rippled and a Survivor entered.
“Look alive, pals,” he said, “there’s another guy looks like he’s going
to get through to us.”

“Hope he makes it,” the barrel-chested Bunny rose. “It’s my turn to put
out the welcome mat.”

“What does he plan to do?” Rod turned to Bill Williamson.

“’Bout the same thing I did for you. If the fellow gets far enough
along, the tetrarchs will retreat, or freeze, and the big fellow will
bring him in.”

“Why don’t we help the guy?”

“What do you mean? What can we do?”

“You said we had plenty of oxygen, didn’t you?”

“Yeah. We got it stored in tanks we stole from the tetrarchs.”

“Well, c’mon, Bill. Let’s explode a few or four.”

“Lor Lumme! Tetrarch popcorn! What all will we need, Rod?”

“About eight men. Two teams--two each--for diversion. And four men for
the push. We’ll try it small scale for size.”

The oxygen tanks were quickly distributed. Rod gave eight Survivors
rapid instructions. “I’ll give you ten minutes to get in position,” he
finished, “Williamson and I will watch from the top heights.”

By the time Rod and Williamson had taken their position high
on the mountain-side the staggering human had won to within a
hundred yards of the final slope. The flames were circling--darting
forward--retreating--only to renew the attack. They were so intent on
their prey they missed the helpless second figure--until he set up a
hoarse scream for help.

When the flames realized there was a second quarry they hesitated--but
not for long. If anything, the second man was farther gone than the one
who was now scrambling up the slope.

The new quarry was bent over a cylinder of some sort. His legs kicked
feebly. His arms were jerking spasmodically as he tried to tear his
suit fastenings.

Almost half the flames raced to him. Tentacles outstretched, they
swooped--into the oblivion of hissing oxygen. A few tried to escape.
Another human stepped from behind a concealing boulder. Rod watched him
play an oxygen stream over them like a pest-sprayer.

The flames which had remained behind reacted instinctively. They
retreated. Their vanguard exploded before two more humans who rose from
the sand-misted shadows of a narrow gorge in the plateau.

They broke then. They fled in wild disorder in the only direction open.
Now, four men rose from concealed positions to bar their way.

The annihilation was complete!

On the heights above, Williamson was dancing a war jig. “We wowed ’em,
Rod,” he screeched. “We wowed ’em. Look at that grey powder! Look at
it! Them’s dead tetrarchs, me boy.”

He pounded Rod on the back in complete forgetfulness of the glowing
doom. “When we get back to earth I’m gonna marry me a nice girl. And
I’m gonna throw pop corn parties every night in the week. And I’m gonna
invite all the neighbors. And when the kernels go ‘Pop’ I’m gonna say,
‘That’s what we did to the tetrarchs.’”

He was still pounding Rod’s back when Bunny came puffing up. “You’d
better come in a hurry, boss,” he said, “that guy down there wants to
talk to you and he ain’t got much time left.”

Rod frowned. “Lets go,” he said briefly.

He ran down the slope to the inert figure that lay like a blade of mown
grass at the base.

When the others arrived he was kneeling by the fallen slave, supporting
him by the head and shoulders. There was no mistaking the ghastly
pallor spreading over the waxen face.

His breathing was jerky--almost spasmodic as he whispered, “And then
they worked on Rickter. They had grown suspicious when things started
to disappear ... when more slaves escaped and never got caught.”

His breathing paused. The skin on the man’s forehead lost its waxy
pallor. It became dry--harsh--yellow-tinged.

Rod braced him more firmly--the tortured chest heaved again. “When they
found out ... about the Survivors ... they decided to finish us. They
had been working to find out about a cure for the gryxon burn. Koler
worked with them and discovered how to make it work faster ... said it
was a catalyst ... forced us to eat it ... one by one.”

“Mona?” Rod asked gently.

“They’ve saved her and a few more ... going to experiment ...
operate ... say humans no use as slaves ... too stiff-necked ... make
better guinea pigs ... we’re finished.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The slave tried to speak again. But his chest was rigid, fixed. His
eyes filmed. He ceased the struggle.

Rod laid him down, still gently and straightened him, crossing his
hands over his chest. Smoke came in a fine haze from the flaring
nostrils. Bloody froth flew from between the drawn lips. The Satanic
grin came with the onslaught of the greenish glow.

And then--there were ashes!

“We’re ready, boss.” Bunny’s voice was quiet.

“Yes,” Williamson’s voice was equally low, “we’ve got time until we’re
twenty-five--to exterminate every tetrarch on the planet. The best we
can hope for is a dead draw. Shall we get started, Rod? There’s little
time left to us.”

“We’ll have the advantage of surprise,” Rod agreed, “unless we walk
into a trap. But I think we can outmaneuver them.”

He turned quickly. “Anyone here within a week of their twenty-fifth
birthday?”

“I don’t think so, Rod.”

“Anyone within a month of their twenty-fifth birthday who is also from
the Mediterranean section of Earth?”

He paused. Their silence gave him his answer.

“Good,” he said, “in this game we’ve still got our hole card.

“Now, remember this one thing. Our objective is the science
building--they operate there--and that’s where they’ll store the
catalyst. Anything else is secondary.

“We’ll try a feint on the slave compartment. We’ll drive in force on
all communication centers. I’ll make maps showing their locations--I
made it my job to get that info before I left Earth. And we’ve got
to kill every tetrarchian space ship crew either at the same time or
immediately after we destroy communications. We’ve none too much oxygen
for a job of this size. That’s our main weapon. So make it count. We’ll
use what blasters we have. And if you run into any tetrarchians with
space suits on aim for the mask. That’s all you need to do before you
give him the explosion treatment. Is everything clear?”

“All we need is to know who’s going to lead who to where,” Bunny said.

“I’ll have plans drawn up at headquarters in half an hour,” Rod
promised. “Meantime leave a twenty-percent reserve of oxygen here and
break the rest down from tanks to all the cannisters you can get your
hands on.”

Rod walked rapidly up the hill outlining details of the battle plan to
Williamson as they entered the cave.

The slave compartment feint-party left first. Communications-destroyers
left in four groups. Space-hangar attack-parties followed. Under
Bunny’s direction, they had managed to rig up a fairly creditable
camouflage.

There was an argument about command of the main force against the
science building. Rod had assumed it without second thought. Williamson
was obdurate.

“I don’t care who handles it, Rod,” he said, “but you can’t. If
anything goes wrong there’ll be no one left to carry the fight. You’ve
got to stay here until we control the lowlands.”

“I’ll be twenty-five next month,” Rod said briefly. “So it can’t matter
much one way or the other.”

“Sorry, Rod. I forgot about that. I’ve only six weeks to go myself. One
of the youngsters will have to take over the reserve.”

“Then you and I will take a whack at this together.”

Williamson draped two cannisters of oxygen about his waist. “Let’s go,”
he said.

Their pace down the mountain was swift but unhurried. On the plateau
Williamson scuffled tetrarchian ashes whenever he found them. They were
fast disappearing in the swirling sand.

They scattered their force when they left the foothills. There was an
occasional tetrarch flame to draw the men’s fire.

       *       *       *       *       *

They encountered their first resistance within blaster range of the
mines. From the roof of the slave compartment purple blaster arcs
rained down. The fire was scattered at first but it increased in volume
when the main body of the Survivors surged into view.

The tetrarchs were no mean marksmen. The stench of burning, smoking
flesh tainted the atmosphere.

As the men broke for cover Rod demonstrated counter measures. He
took position behind a corner wall and fired three times. Each shot
punctured a tetrarchian mask. When the enemy huddled to replace them he
lobbed an oxygen cannister over the roof and blasted it as it poised
at the height of its arc. The hissing gas struck quickly. He saw one
of the unprotected tetrarchs collapse. Its imitation body toppled over
the parapet to the ground. A Survivor wiggled toward it and snatched
a blaster from its limp hand. He accounted for three more on the roof
before they killed him.

His sacrifice gave his fellows an opportunity. While he had engaged the
tetrarchs two Survivors wedged themselves in the corner of a supporting
abutment. One had clambered on the other’s shoulders. The men scrambled
up this living ladder and over the parapet.

In the midst of a wild melee support came--through the roof. The
feinting force that had attacked earlier had taken the interior of
the slave compartment. They cut through the roof when they heard
the scuffling. Oxygen roared through the opening into Tetrarch’s
dead atmosphere. The struggle was brief--and without quarter to the
tetrarchs.

Rod, meanwhile, had reorganized his forces and directed them to proceed
to the science building and surround it.

His Survivors were better equipped now. They had gained blasters.
The feint on the slave compartment had won them the oxygen-making
equipment. It had diverted the enemy from Rod’s main objective. And the
men of the feint-party now stood ready to reinforce him.

A courier dashed to him. Bunny was reporting that all space ship
hangars had been immobilized. He had then turned to assist in the
communications clean up. He wanted further orders.

The orders were brief: to explode all tetrarchians encountered while
proceeding to the science building.

His own men waited in silence. They waited before a quiet, ominous
building. It stood--a squat, sullen pile--a citadel of science
perverted--of infamous torture.

And from it--through a door quickly opened and as quickly shut--a human
emerged. A human who limped and snuffled as he crossed the clearing
toward the Survivors.

“Harrow,” he called, “I’m an emissary to Rod Harrow. I want to speak to
Rod Harrow.”

“All right. What is it?” Rod strode forward despite Williamson’s
restraining hand.

The whimpering slave gathered himself together and spoke as if he had
memorized his piece.

“The tetrarchs say if you’ll surrender yourself they’ll spare the rest
of the humans.”

“Bluff! A miserable bluff!” Williamson had come forward blazing with
indignation. His contempt at the servile gestures of the slave was
mounting. “We’ll kill every tetrarch on the planet--and you with them,
if you’re not careful. You can sniffle on back there and tell them that
their position is hopeless.”

“But don’t you see,” the coward was almost in tears, “they’ve got the
catalyst.” The tears, no longer denied, streaked down his face. “At
first it would work in eight hours no matter what our age. Now, Latham
Koler’s got it so it can work in five min--O-oh! I’ve been hit!”

Rod caught a quick glimpse of Latham Koler’s saturnine grin. He had
appeared at the building opening for a moment and fired.

Rod couldn’t see the weapon he had used but its results were plain. A
tiny dart had pierced the coward’s helmet. It protruded from the back
of his neck.

Williamson plucked the dart and held it in his hand. “It doesn’t look
dangerous,” he said. But Jerry had collapsed.

Rod pointed to the fallen coward. A familiar pallor was spreading over
his features.

“The glow! Rod! Look at it! It’s working already!”

“It’s a stepped-up catalyst all right.” Rod was thoughtful. “That dart
is really a hypo needle. Lets get to cover and see what we can do about
it.”

When Rod outlined his plan Williamson was adamant. They couldn’t go
through with it. He, Williamson, wasn’t going to permit it. But Rod had
his way.

They picked the best marksmen arbitrarily. There were volunteers in
plenty to storm the building if the ruse worked.

It took a little time to stuff their clothes with sand. Williamson
checked them personally to make sure that the layer under their clothes
was at least three inches thick.

When everything was ready Rod strode forward like Achilles taunting the
Trojans. He exhausted his vocabulary. All the vituperative terms he
could remember and a few that came to him extempore were hauled out to
describe the tetrarchs. He told them they would be frozen to provide
lights for their own mines--that the humans would break them into small
chunks to make jewels for Earth’s women.

It worked. It was more than tetrarch nature could take.

       *       *       *       *       *

Doors opened for a fleeting second. The vengeful flames showered him
with darts.

In that brief interval they were met with withering blasts from the
marksmen. The humans had brought the oxygen machinery up from the slave
compartment. It streamed toward the building like water from a pressure
hose.

At the same instant the volunteers rushed. For an instant the fight
teetered in the balance--and then they were in.

Rod bristled with sand-blunted darts as he battered his way through the
honey-combed building, searching for the operating chamber. He burst
through the entrance--to face Mona Darlanan.

They hadn’t had time to work on her. But they’d done their best. They’d
tied her to a vertical platform first.

The dart in her breast had drawn blood!

Latham Koler squirmed from behind the platform. His cadaverous face was
transfixed with the grin of a skeleton skull. He aimed a blaster point
blank at Rod and fired.

The streaming arc buried itself harmlessly in the three-inch sand layer
over Rod’s chest. And he was on Koler like a berserk.

He broke the traitor’s helmet first. And forced fingers and thumb
around his windpipe. When the peering eyes protruded and the
thin-lipped mouth hung agape Rod lifted the dart gently from Mona
Darlanan’s body.

He jammed it down Koler’s throat.

Williamson came pounding in. “We’ve got them all, Rod. Tetrarch IV is
in our hands!”

Rod was frantically tearing at his sleeve. “Get me a knife,” he
ordered, “quickly.”

He ripped the sleeve off. As more and more Survivors came piling into
the room he ordered liters of distilled water.

Meanwhile he was busily plying the scalpel Williamson brought to him.
The gash on his arm had never quite healed was getting probed. Rod dug
with the scalpel as though he were going after a bullet.

The small platinum capsule he forced from the cut in his arm was not
unlike one.

He glanced anxiously at Mona’s face. The pallor had gone. A harshening
of her exquisite skin had taken its place.

The contents of the capsule dissolved in five liters of water in a
matter of seconds. Rod picked an unfilled dart from a litter on a
table. He filled it with his newly made solution and injected it in the
girl’s arm.

They waited.

“Will it do any good, Rod?” Williamson was solemn in the quiet room.

“I don’t know. We developed it on Earth in our lab in the Rockies.
There was plenty of gryxon in our machines. Volunteers exposed
themselves to it. That capsule, Bill, was purchased at the price of
martyrdom.”

“If it works, our race is saved.”

“That’s how they felt about it. We found that raw gryxon was instant
death to humans over twenty-five. Those under twenty-five were immune
unless they came from stock that matured early--as the Mediterranean
peoples. They succumbed before twenty-five. That was what really gave
us our answer. We knew that ankylosis--joining of certain spinal
vertebrae--occurred earlier in humans that matured earlier--and
that age twenty-five was the time for the joinder to occur. So we
turned to the serums that had increased human life spans by retarding
ankylosis--and developed this one.”

They studied Mona’s face again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Was it possible that the yellow tinge was stayed--was turned to waxen
ivory? The girl’s breast rose and fell--ever so gently.

“I concealed our serum,” Rod went on slowly, “from the tetrarchs by
burying it in my arm. I had to get a hypo needle before I could use it
here.”

“Have I had a fever, Rod?” Mona’s grey eyes were open. “Or is this
delirium?”

Rod Harrow crossed to her swiftly. He cradled her head in his arms. She
was smiling again--relaxed.

Then he turned to Williamson. “Line ’em up, Bill. With five liters we
can inoculate every human on Tetrarch IV. There’ll never be a gryxon
glow again.

“And as soon as a company has had all men injected, send them to the
cave to bring back the reserves. We’ll need their help.”

“To celebrate?” Williamson wanted to know.

“Not particularly.” Rod was impatient. “We’ll have to do some planet
cleaning.”

“Planet cleaning!”

“Right! We’re ready now to wipe the tetrarchs off our Earth.”



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AGAINST TETRARCH ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.