12 PIES
                           HUSBANDS LIKE BEST
                        AUNT JENNY’S RECIPE BOOK


        Copyright 1952—Lever Brothers Company—New York, New York

    _Now anyone can make pies to perfection with Spry’s ‘Water-Whip’
                               Method!’_

    [Illustration: Aunt Jenny]

Dear Friend:

Here is my newest Spry cookbook, with 12 recipes for beautiful pies. I’m
so glad you sent for it, and I hope you’ll try every one of them!
They’re recipes you can depend on, because they’ve been tested over and
over again in the Lever Test Kitchens. What’s more, this book is
chock-full of tricks that will make pies the easiest thing you bake!
There’s the easy, quick Spry “Water-Whip” method that takes all the
guesswork out of piecrust even for beginners. There’s an improved
standard pastry recipe. There are dozens of hints for rolling,
decorating—even freezing—pies. Once you’ve tried these easy, simple
methods, you’ll feel like making pies and tarts much more often, I know.
And one member of your family is going to be especially happy—nearly
every man loves pie!

Then give him pie to his heart’s content! Any one of these recipes is
sure to be pie to his liking—they were chosen because they’re the pies
that surveys, research, letters in my mail show most men like best. So
begin anywhere—run your own popularity contest—see which pie wins with
_him_!

                                                      _Sincerely yours,_
                                                            _Aunt Jenny_




                      REGAL CREAM-ON-CHOCOLATE PIE


    [Illustration: REGAL CREAM-ON-CHOCOLATE PIE]

Make a baked “Water-Whip” Pie Shell, page 19.

Soften 1 teaspoon gelatin in 2 tablespoons cold water.

Melt 1 oz. chocolate (cut in pieces) in 1¼ cups milk in top of double
      boiler; blend with rotary egg beater.

Mix ½ cup sugar, 2 tablespoons cornstarch, ¼ teaspoon salt. Add to
      chocolate mixture and cook until thick and smooth, then cook 15
      minutes longer, stirring constantly.

Beat 3 egg yolks well. Stir small amount of chocolate mixture into egg
      yolks, return to double boiler, and cook a few minutes longer.

Add 1 tablespoon butter or margarine, 1 teaspoon vanilla and gelatin
      mixture; mix well. Cool.

Fold in 3 stiffly beaten egg whites.

Whip ½ cup heavy cream and fold into chocolate mixture.

Pour into baked pie shell. Chill in refrigerator several hours, or until
      firm. When ready to serve, whip 1 cup heavy cream and spread over
      filling.

Sprinkle 1 cup grated fresh coconut (or shredded moist coconut) over
      cream and decorate with curls of shaved chocolate. Keep chilled
      until all is served.




                        DEEP-DISH BLUEBERRY PIE


    [Illustration: DEEP-DISH BLUEBERRY PIE]

Make pie dough, using recipe for “Water-Whip” Pie Shell, page 19.

Mix 4 cups fresh blueberries (or blackberries, raspberries,
      boysenberries, or huckleberries), ¾ cup sugar, 1½ tablespoons
      tapioca or flour, ⅛ teaspoon salt, 1 teaspoon lemon juice and put
      in oblong baking dish, 10″ x 6″ x 2″.

Dot 1 tablespoon butter or margarine over berries.

Roll pie dough into a rectangle ⅛″ thick. Fit dough over berries, making
      a crimped edge and pressing it onto edge of dish.

Cut slits for steam to escape.

Decorate top with “blueberries” and “leaves” cut from pastry trimmings.

Bake in hot oven (425°F.) 40-45 minutes.

Serve warm with a mixture of ½ cup mashed cottage cheese, ¼ cup heavy
      cream, whipped, 1 tablespoon confectioners’ sugar, dash of salt,
      and few drops of vanilla. Makes 6 servings.




                          HERITAGE PUMPKIN PIE


    [Illustration: HERITAGE PUMPKIN PIE]

Make an unbaked “Water-Whip” Pie Shell, page 19.

Mix 1½ cups canned or cooked pumpkin (or squash), 1 cup firmly packed
      brown sugar, ½ teaspoon salt, 2 teaspoons cinnamon, 1 teaspoon
      ginger, 2 tablespoons molasses.

Add 3 slightly beaten eggs, 1 cup evaporated milk, and mix thoroughly.

Pour into unbaked, unpricked pie shell.

Bake in hot oven (425°F.) 40-45 minutes, or until knife inserted in
      center comes out clean.

Serve with sharp cheese or with a topping of whipped cream.




                        “HIS FAVORITE” APPLE PIE


    [Illustration: “HIS FAVORITE” APPLE PIE]

Make “Water-Whip” Piecrust, page 15. Divide dough in half and shape each
      into a flat round. Roll one half about ⅛″ thick and line a 9″ pie
      pan.

Prepare 6 cups pared, cored thin apple slices. Arrange half of slices in
      pastry-lined pan.

Mix 1 cup sugar[1], ¾ teaspoon cinnamon, ¼ teaspoon nutmeg, ⅛ teaspoon
      salt, 1 teaspoon lemon juice and sprinkle half of mixture over
      apples in pan. Arrange remaining slices on top and cover with
      remaining sugar mixture.

Dot 1 tablespoon butter or margarine over filling. Trim pastry even with
      pan.

Roll remaining dough as before and lay over apples. Trim pastry ½″
      beyond pan, fold it under bottom crust, press edges together with
      fork. Cut decorative slits in top for steam to escape.

Brush pastry with slightly beaten egg white and sprinkle with sugar.

Bake in hot oven (425°F.) 45-55 minutes.


[1]_If apples are very juicy, add 1 tablespoon cornstarch to sugar
    mixture and blend thoroughly._




                        DREAMY BANANA CREAM PIE


    [Illustration: DREAMY BANANA CREAM PIE]

Make a baked “Water-Whip” Pie Shell, page 19.

Scald 2 cups milk in top of double boiler.

Mix 3 tablespoons flour, 2 tablespoons cornstarch, ½ cup sugar, ¼
      teaspoon salt. Add gradually to scalded milk and cook until thick
      and smooth, then cook 15 minutes longer, stirring constantly.

Beat 3 egg yolks slightly. Stir a small amount of hot mixture into
      yolks, return to double boiler, and cook a few minutes longer.

Add 1 tablespoon butter or margarine, 1 teaspoon vanilla and blend.
      Cool.

Slice 3 or 4 bananas and arrange in baked pie shell; cover at once with
      cooled filling. At serving time, whip ½ cup heavy cream. Drop by
      teaspoonfuls on filling around rim of pie, piling remaining cream
      in center.

Decorate by inserting 2 banana slices, butterfly fashion, into cream at
      tip of each serving.




                       OLD-SOUTH BUTTERSCOTCH PIE


    [Illustration: OLD-SOUTH BUTTERSCOTCH PIE]

Make a baked “Water-Whip” Pie Shell, page 19.

Mix 1¼ cups firmly packed dark brown sugar, ¼ teaspoon salt, 2
      tablespoons water in top of double boiler. Boil over direct heat
      to a thick sirup (about 5 minutes).

Blend ¼ cup milk with 4½ tablespoons cornstarch. Add 1¾ cups milk,
      combine with hot sirup and cook over hot water until thick and
      smooth, then cook 15 minutes longer, stirring constantly.

Beat 3 egg yolks slightly. Stir a small amount of hot mixture into egg
      yolks, return to double boiler, and cook 5 minutes longer.

Add 2 tablespoons butter or margarine, ½ teaspoon vanilla and cool.

Pour into baked pie shell. At serving time, whip 1 cup heavy cream and
      arrange in a border around top of pie leaving a 3″ circle of
      uncovered filling in center.

Arrange pecan halves around filling inside cream border or sprinkle
      filling with coarsely cut toasted pecans. Keep refrigerated until
      all is served.




                         CRUMBLY TOP APPLE PIE


    [Illustration: CRUMBLY TOP APPLE PIE]

Make an unbaked “Water-Whip” Pie Shell, page 19.

Mix ¼ cup sugar, ¾ teaspoon cinnamon, ⅛ teaspoon salt, 4 cups pared,
      cored thin apple slices

Arrange apple slices in pie shell

Blend ¾ cup firmly packed brown sugar, ¾ cup sifted all-purpose flour.

Cut in ⅓ cup butter or margarine with pastry blender or two knives until
      crumbly. Sprinkle over apples.

Bake in moderately hot oven (400°F.) 30-35 minutes. Serve with or
      without cream.




                      LUSCIOUS LEMON MERINGUE PIE


    [Illustration: LUSCIOUS LEMON MERINGUE PIE]

Make a baked “Water-Whip” Pie Shell, page 19.

Mix ½ cup cold water, ¼ teaspoon salt, 7 tablespoons cornstarch.

Combine 1½ cups hot water, 1¼ cups sugar in top of double boiler and
      bring to boil over direct heat. Add cornstarch mixture and cook
      until thickened; place over boiling water and cook until thick and
      smooth (15 minutes), stirring constantly.

Beat 3 egg yolks slightly. Stir a small amount of hot mixture into
      yolks, return to double boiler, and cook a few minutes longer.

Add ⅓ cup lemon juice, grated rind of 1 lemon, 1 tablespoon butter or
      margarine and blend. Cool.

Pour into baked pie shell.

Spread Meringue (page 19) lightly on filling and bake as directed.




                           CHERRY TRELLIS PIE


    [Illustration: CHERRY TRELLIS PIE]

Make Standard Piecrust, page 16. Divide dough in half and shape each
      into a flat round. Roll one half about ⅛″ thick and line a 9″ pie
      pan.

Drain 3 cups canned sour red pitted cherries.

Add ⅓ cup canned cherry sirup, 1 cup sugar, 1 teaspoon lemon juice, ¼
      teaspoon almond extract, 2 tablespoons tapioca or flour, ⅛
      teaspoon salt.

Put cherry mixture in pastry-lined pan.

Dot 1 tablespoon butter or margarine over cherries.

Trim pastry about ½″ beyond pan and turn dough under to make a stand-up
      rim.

Roll remaining dough and cut into strips ½″ wide.

Attach ends of 7 strips to rim of pie by moistening and pressing firmly.
      Twist each strip across fruit and attach at opposite side of pie.
      Repeat with 7 more strips, crisscrossing to form attractive
      trellis top. Flute rim.

Bake in hot oven (425°F.) 50-60 minutes.




                        BEST COCONUT CUSTARD PIE


    [Illustration: BEST COCONUT CUSTARD PIE]

Make a baked “Water-Whip” Pie Shell, page 19.

Beat slightly 3 eggs and 2 egg yolks or 4 eggs.

Add ⅔ cup sugar, ½ teaspoon salt, 2 cups milk, 1 teaspoon vanilla and
      mix. Strain mixture.

Add ¾ cup shredded toasted coconut[2].

Pour into buttered 9″ pie pan.

Sprinkle with ¼ teaspoon nutmeg.

Place pan in larger pan of hot water.

Bake in moderate oven (350°F) 35-40 minutes.

Cool custard at room temperature. (Do not refrigerate or custard will
      stick to pan.)

Loosen custard thoroughly from pan with knife (page 20). Shake gently to
      loosen from bottom. Slide it quickly, but carefully, into baked
      and cooled pie shell. Let settle a few minutes before serving.


[2]_To toast coconut, place in shallow pan and toast in moderate oven
    (350°F.) until browned, stirring often to brown evenly._




                          CORONATION PEACH PIE


    [Illustration: CORONATION PEACH PIE]

Make Standard Piecrust, page 16. Divide dough in half and shape each
      into a flat round. Roll one half about ⅛″ thick and line a 9″ pie
      pan.

Drain 3 cups canned sliced peaches.

Add ½ cup firmly packed brown sugar, ⅓ cup canned peach sirup, 2
      tablespoons lemon juice, 2 tablespoons tapioca, flour, or
      cornstarch, ⅛ teaspoon salt, 1 teaspoon grated orange rind, ¼
      teaspoon almond extract.

Put peach mixture in pastry-lined pan.

Dot 1 tablespoon butter or margarine over peaches.

Roll remaining dough about ³/₁₆″ thick and cut into strips ½″ wide.
      Arrange on filling, starting at center and twisting and winding
      them about 6 times around the top. Join strips by pinching
      together. Brush spiral with slightly beaten egg white and sprinkle
      with sugar. Moisten rim of pie. Press end of 1 strip on rim, twist
      and circle edge of pie, pressing strip against rim where it
      touches. Join strips as before.

Bake in hot oven (425°F.) 45-55 minutes.




                         HOT N HEARTY STEAK PIE


    [Illustration: HOT N HEARTY STEAK PIE]

Fry 1½ cups sliced onions slowly until yellow in ⅓ cup Homogenized Spry.
      Remove onions and save for later use.

Cut 1½ pounds round steak in ½″ pieces and roll in mixture of ⅓ cup
      flour, 3 teaspoons salt, ¼ teaspoon pepper. Sear in hot Spry until
      richly browned.

Add 3¼ cups boiling water, 1 tablespoon Worcestershire sauce and
      sprinkle in any of the flour mixture that remains. Cover and
      simmer until meat is tender (about 1 hour).

Add 1 cup raw potatoes, cut in ½″ cubes. Cook 10 minutes longer.

Make Golden Egg Pastry, page 20.

Roll dough into a rectangle ¼″ thick and about 1″ larger than 10″ x 6″ x
      2″ baking dish.

Pour meat mixture into dish and place cooked onions on top.

Fit pastry over top and seal edge of pie. Mark top into 6 serving
      portions by cutting small Vs with knife point lengthwise and
      crosswise. In center of each square make a decorative steam vent
      by cutting 8 short slits in a snowflake pattern.

Bake in very hot oven (450°F.) 25-30 minutes. Makes 6 servings.

                 _Hints for a “Light Hand” with Pastry_

    [Illustration: Aunt Jenny]

You’ve heard a woman say, admiring another cook’s handiwork. “She has
_such_ a light hand with pastry!” Tender, flaky piecrust has always been
the prize accomplishment of good cooks! And many’s the woman who has
envied it! Now, thanks to Spry and its new “Water-Whip” method, perfect
pastry—every time—is easy as child’s play. And so fast! It’s ready to
roll in seconds!

You see, the “Water-Whip” method answers right from the start that
question that has always been so confusing—“How much water shall I add?”
You simply add a definite, measured amount of liquid right to your
shortening, then whip it into a soft, creamy emulsion! Of course, any
shortening won’t do—the whole method is possible only because Spry is
homogenized, specially made to mix with liquids.

Once your pastry is mixed, the success of your pie depends a great deal
on how you handle the dough. You’ll want to read carefully the pictured
directions for each pastry method and go over the suggestions in the
pages that follow. They’re tricks from skilled pie-makers—ways to make
your pies prettier, more delicious, more certain to win you compliments
from every one who comes to your table! And now—Happy Baking!

            _You can bake BETTER pies with Homogenized Spry_

Dip your spoon into Homogenized Spry—see how much lighter and fluffier
it is than other shortenings—how easy to work with. It’s pre-creamed,
easier, quicker to blend with dry ingredients. And Spry is the _only_
kind of shortening that is specially made to mix with liquids. That’s
what makes the marvelous new “Water-Whip” method possible! You can count
on Spry every time—you’re _sure_ to make flakier, more tender piecrust
than you can possibly get with any other kind of shortening ... in fact.
Lever Brothers Company guarantees just that!

    [Illustration: Homogenized Spry’s Pure Vegetable Shortening]

                      BEST FOR ALL YOU BAKE OR FRY

   _Now you can make tender, flaky pastry the Spry “Water-Whip” way!_

Experienced pie-makers like this new method because it saves time. No
cutting in of shortening ... no tedious adding of liquid. In seconds,
the pie dough is mixed! Beginners like this method because they can
“feel easy” about it. There’s no guessing about how much liquid to add
... no uncertainty about results. The dough goes together almost like
magic, rolls easily, makes tender, delicious pastry on the first try!




                    _To make “Water-Whip Pastry” ...
                         here’s all you do...._


    [Illustration: Put Homogenized Spry in medium-sized mixing bowl and
    pour over it the boiling water and milk. Then tilt the bowl and
    break up shortening with a fork.]

    [Illustration: Whip with rapid cross-the-bowl strokes until all
    liquid is absorbed and mixture is thick and smooth like whipped
    cream and holds soft peaks when fork is lifted.]

    [Illustration: Sift flour and salt onto creamy Spry “Whip.” There’s
    no tedious cutting-in of the shortening ... no guessing as to the
    correct amount of liquid to add.]

    [Illustration: With vigorous round-the-bowl strokes, stir all
    ingredients together into a dough that clings together and “cleans”
    the bowl. Takes only about 33 seconds!]

    [Illustration: Take up dough in hands, work gently into a smooth,
    blended dough, then shape into a flat round. This soft, pliable
    dough is now ready to roll in any preferred way.]


“Water-Whip” dough, being soft and pliable, rolls beautifully between
waxed paper. No messy floured board ... no sticking ... no pastry cloth
or rolling-pin cover needed. From beginning to end, this new rolling
method is neat as a pin, easy, successful! Just follow the techniques
pictured below.




                        _“Water-Whip” Piecrust_


  ¾ cup Homogenized Spry
  ¼ cup boiling water
  1 tablespoon milk
  2 cups all-purpose flour (sifted once before measuring)
  1 teaspoon salt

Put Spry in medium-sized mixing bowl.... Add boiling water and milk and
break up shortening with fork. Tilt bowl and, with rapid cross-the-bowl
strokes, whip with fork until mixture is smooth and thick like whipped
cream and holds soft peaks when fork is lifted.... Sift flour and salt
together onto Spry mixture. Stir quickly, with round-the-bowl strokes,
into a dough that clings together and “cleans” the bowl.... Pick up and
work into a smooth dough; shape into a flat round. The dough is now
ready to roll, either between waxed paper, or on a pastry cloth or
board.

This recipe makes enough pastry for a 9″ 2-crust pie or for a 9″
lattice-top pie or for 9 tart or patty shells.




                EASIER ROLLING WITH “WATER-WHIP” PASTRY


    [Illustration: Roll dough between 12″ squares of waxed paper from
    center out into circle size of paper. If paper wrinkles, remove top
    one, put on another, turn, and roll.]

    [Illustration: To put pastry in pan, peel off top paper, pick up
    pastry and center it over pan, pastry side down. Remove paper
    gently. Such an easy way to roll out piecrust!]

                STANDARD PASTRY ... _the sure Spry Way_

_Standard_ or _conventional pastry_ is made by first cutting the
shortening into the flour. In the _Spry way_ of making standard pastry,
the shortening is cut into the flour in _two steps_: first, ⅔ of the
Spry is cut in _fine_ for _tenderness_; second, the remaining Spry is
cut in _coarse_ for _flakiness_. To make standard pastry this improved
way, follow the recipe and key steps pictured below. See how easy it is
to get perfect pastry every time!




                           Standard Piecrust


  Ingredients           _Two-crust 9″ Pie_    _9″ Pie Shell_
                        _or Lattice Pie_      _or 6 tart shells_

  sifted all-purpose    2 cups                1¼ cups
  flour
  salt                  1 teaspoon            ½ teaspoon
  Homogenized Spry      ¾ cup                 ½ cup
  cold water            4 tablespoons         2½ tablespoons

Put flour and salt in mixing bowl and mix. Cut in Spry as follows:

  Step 1 for Tenderness—cut in about ⅔ of the Spry with pastry blender
  or 2 knives until as fine as meal.

  Step 2 for Flakiness—cut in the remaining Spry to the size of large
  peas.

Sprinkle _all_ the water, 1 tablespoon at a time, over different parts
of mixture. Mix thoroughly with fork until all particles cling together
and form a dough. Take up in hands and work into a smooth, blended ball
of dough. Use in making pies, tarts, turnovers, etc.

Roll standard pastry on a floured board or cloth—not between waxed
paper.

    [Illustration: Cut ⅔ of the Spry into flour with pastry blender
    until as fine as meal. Be sure _all_ the flour is mixed with the
    Spry. This step insures _tenderness_ in the pastry.]

    [Illustration: Cut in remaining Spry to size of large peas. In
    baking, these pieces melt into little “pools” of fat, forming leafy
    flakes. This step insures _flakiness_ in the pastry.]

    [Illustration: Sprinkle water over mixture; mix thoroughly with fork
    until all particles cling together. Take up in hands. Work into a
    smooth, well-blended ball of dough.]




                    _Expert Tricks_ FOR PERFECT PIES


    [Illustration: Pie crust]

Many secrets of pie success lie in the “know-how”—in the techniques and
practices that are part of a pie-maker’s skill. You’ll find many of
these pie tricks in this booklet: how to make a custard pie with a
crisp, flaky undercrust and a soft, creamy filling ... how to seal in
the juices in a berry pie ... how to make a fluffy, upstanding meringue.
There are tips for pretty tops and attractive edges, too—all designed to
give your pies a truly professional air!




           KEEP FRUIT JUICES IN PIE ... _the “Rim-Seal” way_


    [Illustration: To keep fruit juices from boiling out of a 2-crust
    pie, trim undercrust even with pan, cut the top crust ½ inch beyond
    pan, then turn it under the bottom crust.]

    [Illustration: Moisten edge of undercrust with water, press upper
    and lower crusts together with floured fork. Or crimp the edges
    together with the thumb and forefinger.]




                 _Attractive Rims to Flatter Your Pies_


The eye-catching look of a handsome pie comes in large part from its
pastry rim. Clever fingers can fashion an endless variety of attractive
edges. The tines of a fork, a pointed knife, or an inverted teaspoon tip
can be used with good effect, too.

Interesting pastry designs can be made on the rims with tiny patterns or
cutters. Some pies call for a rim of the “stand-up” type, others are at
their best with a flat “lie-down” rim. Select the edge that will do the
most for the filling. You will enjoy using your own ideas and creating
new and original rims to frame your favorite pies. Here are some
attractive edges that are easy to make.

Rope Rim (_for pie shell_)

Make stand-up rim (page 18). Pinch pastry between thumb and bent
forefinger. Make the crimps sharp and distinct so they will not bake
out.

Shell or Flute Rim (_for pie shell_)

Make stand-up rim (page 18). Make shell-like flutes by placing left
index finger against inside of rim and pinching it on outside with tips
of right thumb and index finger. (See Luscious Lemon Meringue Pie, page
8.)

Thimble Rim (_for 1-crust pie_)

Trim pastry even with edge of pan. With thimble, cut tiny circles from
pastry. Moisten rim, place circles, overlapping, on rim, pressing
lightly. (See Heritage Pumpkin Pie, page 3.)

Arrow Head Rim (_for 1-crust pie_)

Cut pastry ½″ beyond pan edge, then fold under making a flat “lie-down”
rim. With knife, cut continuous Vs around rim. With right index finger,
lift up base of every other V and lay back on side of pie shell.
Continue around rim. (See Crumbly Top Apple Pie, page 7.)

Flute-and-Fork Rim (_for pie shell_)

Make stand-up rim (page 18). Make a single flute as described under
Shell or Flute, then next to it press with tines of fork. Continue
around rim, alternating flute and fork. (See Dreamy Banana Cream Pie,
page 5.)

Fork-Seal Rim (_for 2-crust pie_)

A good edge to seal in fruit juices. Press floured tines of fork down on
rim straight or diagonally. (See “His Favorite” Apple Pie, page 4.)

Ruffle Rim (_for closed pie_)

Prepare pie rim as for Fork-Seal if a 2-crust pie; if a deep-dish pie,
trim pastry 1″ beyond dish edge and turn back even with dish. Place left
index finger and thumb ½″ apart on outside of rim. Use right index
finger to pull pastry back between fingers to make ruffled effect. (See
Hot N Hearty Steak Pie, page 12.)




               “Pretty-Pleat” Your Tarts and Patty Shells


    [Illustration: Pleated shells]

Use recipe for “Water-Whip” Piecrust (page 15) or Standard Piecrust
(page 16), for 9 tart shells.... Roll dough ⅛″ thick and prick with
fork.... Cut out 5″ circles and fit over backs of 3″ muffin pans,
pinching into about 7 pleats.... Bake in hot oven (450°F.) 10-15
minutes.... Lift off shells, cool on rack.... Fill tart shells with
fruit or berries for a dainty dessert; or with creamed vegetables,
chicken, or fish for an appetizing main dish for luncheon or supper.




                        _“Water-Whip” Pie Shell_


  ½ cup less 1 tablespoon Homogenized Spry
  3 tablespoons boiling water
  1 teaspoon milk
  1¼ cups all-purpose flour (sifted once before measuring)
  ½ teaspoon salt

Put Spry in medium-sized mixing bowl. Add boiling water and milk and
break up shortening with fork. Tilt bowl and, with rapid cross-the-bowl
strokes, whip with fork until mixture is smooth and thick like whipped
cream and holds soft peaks when fork is lifted.... Sift flour and salt
together onto Spry mixture. Stir quickly, with round-the-bowl strokes,
into a dough that clings together and “cleans” the bowl.... Pick up and
work into a smooth dough; shape into a flat round.... Put dough between
two 12″ squares of waxed paper and roll lightly into a circle about size
of paper. Peel off top paper, place pastry in 9″ pie pan, pastry next to
pan. Carefully remove paper. Fit pastry into pan, trim ½″ beyond pan,
turn back even with edge of pan, flute rim. Prick shell all over with
fork.... Bake in very hot oven (450°F.) 14-19 minutes.

Makes enough pastry for a 9″ pie shell.




                                MERINGUE


A handsome meringue is the final touch of flattery to a beautiful pie.
Here is a recipe with 7 success secrets written into it:

  3 egg whites
  6 tablespoons fine granulated sugar
  1 teaspoon lemon juice or ½ teaspoon vanilla

  1. Beat egg whites until stiff and dry (better volume is obtained if
  whites are not too cold).

  2. Add sugar gradually—1 tablespoon at a time—beating well after each
  addition. Continue beating until stiff peaks form when egg beater is
  lifted.

  3. Add flavoring (the meringue should have flavor as well as the
  filling).

  4. Spread meringue lightly over cooled filling in pie shell, making
  sure it touches pastry rim all around. (This helps prevent shrinkage.)

  5. Make graceful swirls or peaks in the meringue with back of
  tablespoon or spatula.

  6. Bake in slow oven (325°F.) 25-30 minutes, or until meringue is firm
  and delicately browned.

  7. Let pie cool on rack away from drafts.




       TO MAKE A SHAPELY PIE SHELL, FOLLOW THESE EASY TECHNIQUES


    [Illustration: Fit dough into pan; trim pastry with scissors about 1
    inch beyond edge of pan.]

    [Illustration: Turn back pastry; then raise fold, press against pie
    pan, making stand-up rim.]

    [Illustration: For a rope rim, pinch with thumb and bent forefinger,
    making sharp crimps.]

    [Illustration: Prick shell all over with fork. Bake in very hot oven
    (450°F.) 10 to 15 minutes.]




                            _Banbury Tarts_


  2 eggs, well beaten
  1 cup seeded raisins, chopped
  1 cup sugar
  1 tablespoon soft bread crumbs
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  2 tablespoons grated lemon rind
  ¼ cup walnuts, chopped
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  “Water-Whip” Piecrust, page 15

Mix first 8 ingredients.... Roll dough ⅛″ thick and cut in eight 5″
circles. Fit circles into 3″ muffin pans, pinching into fluted rims at
top. Fill with raisin mixture. Place cut-out pastry star on top of each
tart. Sprinkle stars with red sugar.... Bake in hot oven (400°F.) 30-40
minutes.... Makes 8 tarts.




                           _Mince Turnovers_


Use recipe for Piecrust, page 15 or 16. Roll dough ⅛″ thick and cut out
5″ circles. On one half of each circle place 2 tablespoons mincemeat.
Moisten edge, fold pastry over mincemeat, seal edge with fork. Prick
top. Bake in hot oven (425°F.) 10-15 minutes. Makes 8-10.




                          _Golden Egg Pastry_


Mix 1 cup sifted all-purpose flour and ½ teaspoon salt. Measure ⅓ cup
Spry.

  Step 1 for Tenderness—cut in about ⅔ of the Spry until fine as meal.

  Step 2 for Flakiness—cut in remaining Spry to size of large peas.

Add 1 egg, slightly beaten, and mix thoroughly into a dough. Use in
making Hot N Hearty Steak Pie, page 12.




                          _To Freeze Pies..._


Now the miracle of making pies weeks ahead, freezing them in a home
freezer or the freezer section of a refrigerator, and enjoying them
fresh from the oven when convenient! Favorites for freezing are
double-crust pies like apple, cherry, peach, mince, or berry, also
deep-dish fruit and berry pies.

Pies can be frozen unbaked or baked. If frozen unbaked, do not cut steam
vents in top crust; wrap in moisture-vaporproof material and seal;
label, date, and freeze. To thaw, remove wrappings and cut small steam
vents in top crust. Bake in 425°F. oven for 65-70 minutes. If pie is
frozen baked, let pie cool thoroughly at room temperature, then wrap in
moisture-vaporproof material and seal; label, date, and freeze. To thaw,
remove wrappings from frozen pie and heat in 400°F. oven for 25-35
minutes.

Pie shells can be frozen unbaked or baked and kept on hand for use as
needed. If pie is frozen unbaked, it is easier to freeze it before
wrapping, then wrap immediately in moisture-vaporproof material and
store in freezer.... To thaw, unwrap shell and bake in 450°F. oven 5
minutes; reprick shell and bake about 10 minutes longer. If pie shell is
frozen baked, let the baked shell cool thoroughly at room temperature,
then wrap in moisture-vaporproof material and seal; label, date, and
freeze.... To thaw, leave shell wrapped and let stand at room
temperature _or_ unwrap and heat in 400°F. oven 5 minutes.




                     _HOW TO “SLIP” A CUSTARD PIE_


    [Illustration: For creamy custard and crisp crust, bake shell and
    custard separately (page 10).]

    [Illustration: Loosen the cooled custard, then slide it carefully
    into baked, cooled pie shell.]

                      _Give Your Pie A Pretty Top_

A pretty top lends distinction to any pie, be it plain or fancy. A
sparkling glaze gives a touch of elegance to a two-crust fruit pie....
To make a glazed top, brush the unbaked pie with slightly beaten egg
white and sprinkle with sugar, then bake.... For an extra-brown crust,
brush the top crust before baking with milk or light cream, then
sprinkle with sugar.




                        _Lattice and Open Tops_


    [Illustration: Lattice top]

Lattice-top fruit pies with colorful juices bubbling up through golden
strips of pastry are always a favorite.... The narrow pastry strips can
be cut with a pastry wheel or sharp-pointed knife.... For a trellis top,
the strips are twisted as they are laid across the filling (Cherry
Trellis Pie, page 9).... For a woven lattice top, weave the strips over
and under one another.... For a crisscross top, lay a first set of seven
strips across the filling, then lay a second set over them, making
diamond shapes on the filling.... For a spiral top, arrange strips on
filling in a spiral effect by starting at the center and twisting and
winding around the top six times (Coronation Peach Pie, page 11).... A
hit-and-miss top offers pleasing contrasts on a prune or raisin pie.
Just cut many little odd-shaped bits of pastry from the trimmings and
scatter them over the top of the filling before baking.... Whipped cream
makes glamorous toppings on soft pies, especially when accented with
drifts of grated fresh coconut and curls of shaved chocolate (Regal
Cream-on-Chocolate Pie, page 1).... Or make a snowy ruff of whipped
cream by dropping teaspoonfuls of cream around the rim of the pie, then
garnish as shown in Dreamy Banana Cream Pie, page 5.




                        _Decorative Steam Vents_


    [Illustration: Decorative vents]

Small slits or other openings must be made in closed pies in order to
let steam escape during baking. These can be extremely attractive and in
harmony with the pie filling. For example, on the top crust of a fruit
pie, prick or cut the outlines of the fruit used, such as apples,
peaches, or plums.... An interesting cherry pie can be made by cutting
eight half-inch holes in the top crust to represent cherries. For stems,
cut slits.... To personalize a pie, prick the initials of the one you
wish to honor.... For a Christmas mince pie, roll the top crust, and cut
with small Christmas tree cutter, making 5 trees and pointing the tips
of the trees to the rim of the pie. The trees should not be cut out of
the dough—merely outlined. Brush the trees with egg white and sprinkle
with red sugar.




                        _Perky Pastry Cut-outs_


    [Illustration: Pastry cut-outs]

Interesting pastry cut-outs, such as fruits, berries, leaves, chickens,
birds, and the like can be applied to pie tops with happy effects (see
the cluster of blueberries and leaves on the Deep-Dish Blueberry Pie,
page 2).... The unbaked pastry “patches” are laid on the top crust
before baking and brushed with unbeaten egg white or milk.... Tiny
pastry stars, hearts, or crescents can be baked and arranged on the top
of a chiffon pie.... For the holidays, Christmas trees or bells can be
cut out of pastry and laid atop the unbaked filling.

    [Illustration: Wraparound cover image]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 12 PIES HUSBANDS LIKE BEST: AUNT JENNY'S RECIPE BOOK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.