FREE Instructions




                                   60
                                  NEW
                              TRIMMED GIFT
                                 IDEAS
                           FUN • EASY TO MAKE


                                WRIGHT’S
                                 Trims
               WM E WRIGHT & SONS CO., WEST WARREN, MASS.




                              INSTRUCTIONS


_Item numbers—shown in parentheses—for example_ (P501) _are alternate
trimmings that can be used to achieve the same effect_.




                     “LITTLE PEOPLE” Tree Ornaments


Shown on cover.... (See page 18 for instructions)




                   MOTHER-DAUGHTER NET APRONS (page 4)


You’ll need: (for both aprons)

  1 yd. nylon net, red
  5 yds. Wright’s Metallic Loop Braid 9957 (P509), gold
  15 yds. Wright’s Metallic Baby Rick Rack 9814 (P500), gold
  4 yds. 1½″ grosgrain ribbon, red


To make Mother’s Apron:

1. Cut strip of net 18″ x 72″. Stitch row of Loop Braid along bottom
      edge, then 3 rows of baby rick racks paced ½″ apart above braid.
      Repeat border 2½″ above.

2. Shirr top of apron to 16″.

3. Cut 2 yds. ribbon. Stitch apron to center section of ribbon at edge.
      Fold to back and stitch covering seam.


To make Daughter’s Apron:

1. Cut strip of net 12″ x 36″. Repeat step 1 above leaving ½″ spaces.

2. Shirr top of apron to 12″.

3. Cut 1½ yds. ribbon. Repeat step 3 above.




                      MULTI-ORNAMENT APRON (page 4)


You’ll need:

  2½ yds. Wright’s Metallic Regular Rick Rack 9825 (P501), gold
  5⅔ yds. Wright’s Metallic Baby Rick Rack 9814 (P500), gold
  5 small pieces fabric, bright colors
  1 plain basic apron, white (1 yd. fabric)
  Sequins, multi-color


To apply trim design:

1. Cut 5 different ornament shapes from colored fabrics and trim in a
      variety of ways using rick rack and sequins.

2. Stitch baby rick rack around edges of ornaments on right side having
      points even with raw edge. Press rick rack under at stitched line.
      Top stitch to apron with rick rack points showing, positioning
      ornaments as shown.

3. Stitch regular rick rack from waistband to each ornament and over
      lower edge of waistband.




                       GOLD ROSE STOCKING (page 5)


You’ll need:

  3¼ yds. Wright’s Loop Braid 9935 (P514), gold
  ½ yd. Wright’s Metallic Tubing 9963 (P507), gold
  3½ yds. Wright’s Metallic Jumbo Rick Rack, 9846 (P503), gold
  12″ x 24″ piece felt, white
  red felt


To make:

1. Cut 2 stocking shapes from felt.

2. Seam outside edges, cut away excess, clip into curves, then reverse
      to right side. Press.

3. Cut curved shapes from red felt approximately 12″ x 3″ and 6″ x 3″.
      Glue to stocking.

4. Make 4 rosebuds, 1 full bloom rose, and 10 leaves from metallic rick
      rack (see Appli-tique instructions page 23.)

5. Cut 4″ tubing; glue in “s” curve for stem in smaller section. Glue
      rosebud at each end; arrange 4 leaves on stem.

6. Cut 10″ tubing; glue in wave line for stem in larger shape. Glue full
      bloom rose at center of stem; rosebuds at each end; 3 leaves on
      each end of stem.

7. Glue loop braid around shapes and around outside of stocking.

8. Cut felt strip 1″ x 5″; glue loop braid to long sides. Fold in half
      and glue inside stocking to form loop for hanging.




                        STRIPED STOCKING (page 5)


You’ll need:

  1½ yds. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9962, gold
  1¾ yds. Wright’s Metallic Middy Braid 9961 (P506), gold
  1½ yds. Wright’s Wide Bias Tape 260, rose
  18″ x 36″ Felt, green


To make:

1. Cut 2 stocking shapes from felt.

2. Glue wide bias tape and gold braids to form stripes on stocking as
      shown.

3. Stitch shapes with right sides together leaving opening across top.
      Trim seam, clip curves and turn to right side.

4. Cut felt strip 1″ x 5″ and glue middy braid to long sides. Fold in
      half and glue inside stocking to form loop for hanging.




                      FRINGE DOT STOCKING (page 5)


You’ll need:

  2¼ yds. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9997 (P515), gold
  1 yd. Wright’s Metallic Fringe 9949 (P510), gold
  18″ x 36″ Felt, red
  Sequins, multi-color


To make:

1. Cut 2 stocking shapes from felt. Glue together around edges leaving
      top open.

2. On front glue row of braid ½″ from top edge and across tip to form
      toe outline of stocking. Glue braid around entire outer edge of
      stocking.

3. Cut fringe in 2″ strips. Seam two ends together and gather into
      circle. Glue 16 circles at random on front of stocking. Glue
      sequin in center of each circle.

4. Cut felt strip 1″ x 5″ and glue braid to long sides. Fold in half and
      glue inside stocking to form loop for hanging.

    [Illustration: See page 2 for instructions]

    [Illustration: See page 3 for instructions]




                RED FELT NOEL BANNER (gold lace) (page 8)


You’ll need:

  2¼ yds. Wright’s Metallic Middy Braid 9961 (P506), gold
  3½ yds. Wright’s Metallic Lace 9946 (P508), gold
  ⅓ yd. Wright’s Metallic Soutache Braid 9960 (P505), gold
  30″ x 7″ Felt, red and 8″ dowel stick with end slits


To make:

1. Fold top of felt under 1″ and glue edge for dowel stick casing.

2. Fold bottom edge in half; cut diagonally from corner up to 1¾″ on
      fold.

3. Mark 4″ N O E L letters evenly spaced down center of panel.

4. Glue 2 rows lace to form letters. Glue middy braid at outer edges of
      panel.

5. Insert stick into casing. Knot ends of soutache and slip into slits
      of stick.




                       TREE WALL HANGING (page 8)


You’ll need:

  ⅔ yds. Wright’s Metallic Soutache, 9960 (P505), gold
  7⅓ yds. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9962, gold
  2½ yds. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9882 (P511), gold
  White felt 15″ x 27″
  Dowel stick 16″, slit at ends.


To make:

1. Fold under top of felt 1″ and glue edge for dowel stick casing.

2. Draw trunk line at center 22″ long.

3. Cut two 11″ strips flat braid (9962) for lower branches. Place ends
      flat at center 4″ from trunk base. Fold under loop end for branch
      tip slanting 1″ lower than at trunk. Repeat branches making 1″
      shorter for each set leaving 2″ spaces. (Total of 8 sets)

4. Glue decorative braid above each branch varying length ⅝″.

5. Cut 44″ flat braid for trunk. Fold and glue as for branches with raw
      ends at tree base. Glue decorative braid over center of trunk.

6. Cut four 1½″ pieces flat braid. Crisscross into star at tree top.
      Clip ends diagonally, then glue. Glue decorative braid in circle
      at center.

7. Glue flat braid at outer edges of panel.

8. Insert dowel into casing. Knot ends of soutache and slip into slits
      of dowel stick.




                GOLD FRINGE TREE (Illustrated on page 13)


You’ll need:

  8 to 9 yds. Wright’s Metallic Fringe 9949 (P510), gold
  ¼ yd. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9957 (P509), gold
  12 Jewels[1]
  6″ Styrofoam cone
  Funnel (sprayed gold) 2½″ diameter
  Small finial for top


To make:

1. Starting at bottom of cone pin overlapping rows of fringe around cone
      completely covering it.

2. Pin jewels to tree for ornaments.

3. Glue row of gold braid around large rim of funnel.

4. Insert tip of funnel into bottom of cone and glue to hold. This forms
      base for tree.

5. Glue finial to top of tree for ornament.




                      FESTIVE TABLECLOTHS (page 9)
                           For 72″ x 54″ size


Mark and cut rounded corners.

Add metallic borders.


WHITE TABLECLOTH

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

You’ll need:

  14 yds. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9885, gold
  14 yds. Wright’s Metallic Soutache 9960 (P505), gold
  7 yds. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9997 (P515), gold


To make:

1. Fold edge ¼″ to right side. Stitch braid over edge. Stitch second row
      2″ from first.

2. Center and stitch middle trim as indicated, then add soutache.


GREEN TABLECLOTH

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

You’ll need:

  14 yds. Wright’s Baby Rick Rack 413, scarlet
  14 yds. Wright’s Metallic Soutache 9960 (P505), gold
  7 yds. Wright’s Jumbo Rick Rack 345, scarlet
  7 yds. Wright’s Decorative Middy Braid 9980 (P519), red/green/gold


To make:

1. Narrowly hem edge of cloth. Stitch hem. Stitch second row 2½″ from
      first.

2. Center and stitch middle trim as indicated, then add soutache.


RED TABLECLOTH

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

You’ll need:

  14 yds. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9965, silver/red
  7 yds. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9882 (P511), silver


To make:

1. Fold edge ¼″ to right side. Stitch braid over edge. Stitch second row
      2″ from first.

2. Center and stitch middle trim as indicated.

    [Illustration: See page 6 for instructions]

    [Illustration: See page 7 for instructions]




                   POP BOTTLE CANDLE HOLDER (page 12)


You’ll need: (for one)

  2½ yds. Wright’s Metallic Rick Rack 9825 (P501), gold
  4 yds. Wright’s Metallic Middy Braid 9961 (P506), gold
  Pop bottle, green
  Gift paper, blue


To make:

1. Cut 8 pieces of gift paper 2¼″ x 3¼″.

2. Glue 4 pieces paper vertically and overlapping around sloping sides
      of upper half of bottle to cover printing. Repeat for lower half
      of bottle.

3. Glue trim in rows over bands alternating middy braid and rick rack,
      starting and ending with a row of middy braid. Continue with middy
      braid rows covering lower part of bottle.

4. Glue rick rack around wide part of neck, then middy braid above and
      below touching rick rack points.




                           BOOKMARKS (page 12)


For quick-to-make, colorful bookmarks, use various lengths of Wright’s
trims glued to felt or ribbon in pleasing designs. Mix textures of
ribbon and trim to create interesting effects.




               LOOP BRAID POSY—TISSUE BOX COVER (page 12)


You’ll need:

  3⅓ yds. Wright’s Metallic Loop Braid 9956, gold
  ⅔ yd. Velvet Ribbon ¼″ wide, avocado
  9″ x 14″ felt, lt. blue


To make:

1. Centering felt over box, pin to miter corners. Stitch corners, trim
      seams, press and turn to right side.

2. Glue two 10″ lengths braid (with headings overlapped) up end and
      across top 1″ from outside edge.

3. Cut two 6″ pieces ribbon and make two figure-8 loops. Overlap at
      right angles and glue at end of braid on box top.

4. To make Posy—fold 24″ braid in half. Fold raw ends in and roll
      loosely on itself into a disk. Stitch through base of disk to hold
      and glue over ribbon loops.

5. Repeat steps 2, 3 and 4 for other side.

6. Glue braid at bottom edge of cover (loops upward). Cut slit at center
      of top for tissue pull-thru.




                      GOLD PENCIL HOLDER (page 12)


You’ll need:

  4 yds. Wright’s Metallic Middy Braid 9961 (P506), gold
  ½ yd. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9887 (P512), gold
  1 Frozen juice can
  9″ square felt, red
  Dried Beans, cardboard, glue


To make:

1. Glue layer of dried beans in bottom of can for weight. Cut circle of
      cardboard to fit and glue over beans.

2. Line inside of can with felt. Cut felt circle and glue to bottom of
      can.

3. Glue middy braid around bottom of can and continue by overlapping
      rows slightly, covering entire can.

4. Glue braid 9887 around top and bottom edge of can.




                          VALET TRAY (page 12)


You’ll need:

  ¾ yd. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9962, gold
  ¾ yd. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9968 (P516), gold
  12″ sq. felt, moss green
  Box—4″ x 7″ x 1″


To make:

1. Cut two felt strips to cover outside and inside walls of box. Glue in
      place.

2. Cut felt to fit inside and outside of box bottom. Glue in place.

3. Glue middy braid at box top binding edge and mitering corners.

4. Glue decorative braid around outside wall of box.




                       CROWN PINCUSHION (page 12)


You’ll need:

  1 yd. Wright’s Metallic Fringe 9949, (P510), gold
  1 yd. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9965, gold/red
  ¼ yd. Velveteen Fabric, red
  ½ styrofoam ball, 4″ diameter
  Jar lid, 3½″ diam.; dried beans; glue


To make:

1. Glue layer of dried beans in bottom of lid for weight.

2. Cut circle of velveteen 4½″ diameter. Cover bottom and sides of lid
      slashing and overlapping fabric to fit. Glue in place.

3. Cut circle of velveteen 9″ diameter. Glue 2 rows of braid 9965 across
      fabric dividing circle into quarter sections.

4. Pin fabric to half ball along trimming lines. Ease in quarter
      sections for puffy effect and pin underneath. Glue ball into lid.

5. Fold 12″ fringe in half, roll on itself and tack. Cover fringe
      heading with row of 9965. Glue to center top.

6. Glue 2 rows fringe around base with headings overlapped. Add braid
      9965 over center.




                 PEARL & MIDDY BRAID KEY CHAIN (page 12)


You’ll need:

  1¾ yds. Wright’s Metallic Middy Braid 9961 (P506), gold
  Four pearls (8mm)
  gold thread
  Key chain


To make:

1. Cut 12″ middy braid. Fold in half and roll raw ends around pearl and
      continue rolling braid on itself to form disk, place pin thru end
      and pearl to hold. Hand tack securely. Repeat for other motifs.

2. Hand tack circles together in form of cross with braid ends to
      inside.

3. Cut 11″ middy braid. Fold in half and glue together. Starting between
      side disks bury raw ends and glue braid around entire outside
      curving to fit entire shape. Pull up 1″ of braid at top to form
      loop and hand tack. Continue gluing to end. Insert chain into
      loop.




                       JEWELED KEY CHAIN (page 12)


You’ll need:

  2 yds. Wright’s Metallic Middy Braid 9961, (P506), gold
  2 Jewels, blue ⅜″ diameter
  Gold thread
  Key chain


To make:

1. Fold Middy Braid in half, roll ends around pencil and continue
      rolling on itself up to 9″ from end. Pin to hold.

2. Cut through 1 piece braid 1″ from fold. Keep braid together and bring
      back to pin. Continue rolling to ½″ from folded end. Hand tack
      securely. Insert chain into loop.

3. Glue jewels in hole, back to back.

    [Illustration: See pages 10-11 for instructions]

    [Illustration: See page 6 for instructions]




                        PINE CONE TREE (page 13)


You’ll need:

  1 styrofoam cone, 12″ high
  3″ diameter, styrofoam circle 2″ high
  ¾″ diameter dowel stick, 8″ long
  Spruce pine cones, 3″ long
  1½ yds. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9882 (P511), gold
  5 yds. Wright’s Metallic Fringe 9884, gold
  5½ yds. Wright’s sequin trim 9870 in each color: Red, Emerald, Gold
  Plyable firm wire cut to 3″ lengths
  Straight pins, styrofoam glue


To make:

1. Join tree to base with dowel, making a hole in each first and using
      glue to hold.

2. Wind braid 9882 around base and continue winding to cover completely.
      Use pins or glue to hold.

3. Pin 1 row fringe 9884 to bottom of tree cone.

4. Shape wire piece into “U” over finger, insert through blunt end of
      pine cone, dip wire ends into glue and insert into tree with cone
      tip 1″ below tree. Repeat with second cone placing it next to
      first with blunt end even with tree edge. Alternate around tree.
      Repeat rows to top.

5. Weave fringe 9884 between each cone by curving at top or bottom of
      cones.

6. Add red sequins over fringe using pins to hold. Repeat with opposite
      weave using green sequins.

7. Roll ½ yd. fringe on itself for tree top. Pin or glue to hold.

8. Make deep loops or scallops over entire tree with gold sequins.




                     BUTTERFLY PLEAT TREE (page 13)
                            (Vertical Pleat)


You’ll need:

  2½ yds. Wright’s Butterfly Pleat Ruffling 8736, gold
  4 yds. Wright’s Metallic Lace 9946 (P508), gold
  18″ square felt, red
  12″ Styrofoam cone
  Styrofoam blocks for base: 3″ x 3″ and 2½″ x 2½″
  Dowel stick, glue, pins


To make:

1. Cover cone with red felt. Pin ruffling in 6 vertical rows evenly
      spaced.

2. Pin row of lace between ruffling.

3. Pin ruffling around bottom of tree.

4. Make 2 “figure-8” loops each from 8″ lace and pin to tree top. Pin
      lace around tree base.

5. Join tree to base with dowel stick.




                     BUTTERFLY PLEAT TREE (page 13)
                           (Horizontal Pleat)


You’ll need:

  12″ styrofoam cone and 1 dowel stick
  2 styrofoam squares: 3″ x 3″ and 2½″ x 2½″
  2 yds. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9882 (P511), gold
  1½ yds. Wright’s Butterfly Pleat Ruffling 8736, white/gold


To make:

1. Pin 5 rows Butterfly Pleat around cone, evenly spaced.

2. Pin gold braid 9885 in rows between Butterfly Pleat rows.

3. Fold 2″ of Butterfly Pleat in half; roll on itself for tree top.

4. Glue styrofoam squares together, add braid for tree base.

5. Insert dowel stick to join tree and base.




                       GOLD FRINGE TREE (page 13)


(See page 6 for instructions)




                        FROU FROU BALL (page 16)


You’ll need:

  1 styrofoam ball, 4″ diameter
  2 yds. Wright’s Butterfly Pleat Ruffling 8736, gold
  ¼ yd. Wright’s Metallic Cord 9917 (P504), gold
  ⅓ yd. Wright’s Metallic Middy Braid 9961 (P506), gold
  1 yd. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9977, gold


To make:

1. Mark ball into ¼ sections. Pin ruffling over markings.

2. Stagger 3″ strips to fill in each section.

3. For tassel wind braid (9977) around 3″ card; tie braid together at
      one edge of card, remove from card. Wind middy braid around tied
      end for ½″. Tack or glue to hold. Cut opposite loop. Unravel. Pin
      tassel to bottom of ball.

4. For top loop insert pins in opposite directions at both ends of 6″
      cord.




                   SILVER SEQUIN STYRO BALL (page 16)


You’ll need:

  3 yds. Wright’s sequin trim 9871, silver
  ¾ yd. satin ribbon, rose
  1¼ yds. satin ribbon, aqua
  ⅓ yd. satin ribbon, orchid
  1 styrofoam ball, 4″ diameter


To make:

1. Mark ball into ¼ sections; pin rose ribbon over markings.

2. Cut and pin aqua ribbon strips to fill ¼ sections. Cut 3″ strips
      orchid ribbon, pointing ends, and pin to center of each ¼ section.

3. Pin sequin trim around edge of orchid section; repeat at edges of
      rose ribbon. Pin 5 separate sequins down center of each orchid
      section.

4. For top loop, insert pins in opposite directions into ball at both
      ends of 6″ sequin trim.




                    GOLD SEQUIN STYRO BALL (page 16)


You’ll need:

  3 yds. Wright’s Sequin trim 9870, gold
  1¾ yds. satin ribbon, blue
  1⅓ yds. satin ribbon, magenta
  1 styrofoam ball, 4″ diameter


To make:

1. Mark ball into ¼ sections. Pin blue ribbon over markings. Repeat to
      divide sections in half; repeat horizontally to divide ball in
      half.

2. Cut and pin magenta ribbon to fit triangle.

3. Pin sequin trim around edges of triangles.

4. For top loop, insert pins in opposite directions into ball at both
      ends of 6″ sequin trim.




                   CHRISTMAS TREE ORNAMENTS (page 16)


Use clear plastic pill containers and line with colored gift paper or
leave clear and attach Christmas balls or bells to the hanger for
see-through look. Add rows of Wright’s decorative metallic trims to
create charming tree ornaments. Puncture one end and insert Wright’s
Metallic Soutache 9960 (P505), for hanger. Trims used are 9956, 9949
(P510), 9882 (P511).




                    SPRAY CAN CAP ORNAMENTS (page 16)


Interesting ornaments are created from 2 spray can caps. Puncture one
and insert soutache braid loop or hanging. Glue rims together forming a
cylinder. Add rows of metallic braids.

    [Illustration: See page 15 and page 18 for instructions]

    [Illustration: See page 18 for instructions]




                         SEQUIN BELLS (page 16)


You’ll need:

  1 styrofoam bell shape, 2½″ high
  3 yds. Wright’s Sequin Trim 9870, gold or silver
  3″ diameter circle felt, red or green
  straight pins


To make:

1. Fit felt circle over base of bell, cut away excess at edges and for
      clapper. Pin to hold.

2. Pin sequin strip over edge of felt and wind continuously around bell
      to top covering styrofoam completely. Pin where needed to hold.

3. Pin sequin strip around clapper in same manner.




                        PAPER CUP BELLS (page 16)


Cover paper cups with colored gift paper and use various lengths of
Wright’s decorative metallic trims to create charming bells to hang on a
tree. Insert 6″ pipe cleaner through bottom of cup rolling lower end to
form bell clapper and making hook in upper end to hang bell. One cup may
be opened to use as a pattern for paper coverings. Trims used here are:
9900/44 (P502), 9885, 9957 (P509), 9900/65, 9997 (P515).




                       DECORATED BASKETS (page 17)


Take any basket, paint it or line it, trim it tastefully and use it as a
container to glamorize a gift of goodies such as cookies, jams, nuts,
toys, soaps, etc. Decorated baskets will be treasured long after the
contents are gone for mail holders, totes for small items, sewing
supplies, etc. Trims make them special, use rows of metallic braids in
combinations, rows of metallic rick rack in varying sizes, etc. Apply
with glue. Fill baskets with crushed tissue and insert gift.




                     “LITTLE PEOPLE” Tree Ornaments
                       (4″ high) (Shown on cover)


You’ll need: (for 1 pair)

  9 yds. Wright’s Cording 9917 (P504)
  metallic gold felt scraps and thread to match
  black thread


To make:

1. Cut twelve 8″ strips cording. Remove filler cord from each. Keep
      strips even and tie snugly at center. Fold in half, tie ¾″ below
      for neck, and 1″ below for waist.

2. For man only: Separate lower strips for legs; braid and tie ends.

3. Cut six 9″ strips cording. Remove filler cord. Tie at one end. Braid
      and tie other end. Insert below neck for arms.

4. Fray all ends of braid by rubbing against palm of hand.

5. At neck, waist and wrists (ankles for man) wind with colored thread
      ⅛″ wide for color accent.

6. Stitch eyes and nose with black thread.

7. Cut felt accessories. Lady: hat and sash; Man: hat and jacket. Tack
      in place on each figure.

8. Tie hanging loop at back of neck.

    [Illustration: MAN’S JACKET • MAN’S HAT • LADY’S BONNET • LADY’S
    SASH—4′ LONG
    SHOWN ONE HALF ACTUAL SIZE]




                        NARROW HEADBAND (page 20)


You’ll need:

  2¼″ yds. Wright’s Metallic Middy Braid 9961 (P506), gold
  1 plastic headband, ⅜″ wide
  Thread, gold colored
  Glue


To make:

1. Glue 1½″ strip of braid over each end of headband.

2. Beginning at end follow instructions for bangle bracelet.




                         WIDE HEADBAND (page 20)


You’ll need:

  3 yds. Wright’s Metallic Middy Braid 9961 (P506), gold
  ½ yd. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9882 (P511), gold
  1 plastic headband, ¾″ wide
  Thread, gold colored
  Glue


To make:

1. Glue three 1½″ strips middy braid in fan shape to cover ends of
      headband.

2. Beginning at end follow instructions for bangle bracelet.

3. Glue braid 9961 (P506), over center of headband.




                       BANGLE BRACELETS (page 20)


You’ll need: (for one)

  1½ yds. Wright’s Metallic Middy Braid 9961 (P506), gold
  1 plastic bangle bracelet, ¼″ wide
  Thread, gold colored


To make:

1. Wind middy braid very snugly around bracelet covering starting end.
      Pin or glue if necessary. Hold firmly with hand and continue
      winding snugly around bracelet overlapping each preceding row
      sightly until completely covered.

2. Insert pin through braid to hold. Finish by folding braid under on
      inside of bracelet. Cut away excess braid. Pin and hand tack fold
      securely.




               GOLD BOBBY OR HAIR PIN ORNAMENTS (page 20)


You’ll need: (for one)

  6″ Wright’s Metallic Jumbo Rick Rack 9846 (P503), gold
  3″ Wright’s 413 Baby Rick Rack, scarlet
  1 bobby or hair pin


To make:

1. Make 3 Rick Rack Leaves (see Appli-tique Instructions page 23) from
      gold jumbo rick rack.

2. Hand tack leaf sides together making a 3 petal flower.

3. Make 1 Flower Center (see Appli-tique Instructions page 23) from 3″
      scarlet baby rick rack. Hand tack to center of flower.

4. Securely hand tack flower to end of bobby or hair pin.




                         GOLD POSY PIN (page 20)


You’ll need:

  1⅓ yds. Wright’s Metallic Loop Braid 9956, gold
  1 cover our own button No. 60
  1 pin back
  Scrap of fabric—yellow or gold color


To make:

1. Remove shank from bottom of button. Cover button as directed on
      package.

2. Fold braid in half. Fold raw ends in and roll loosely on itself into
      a disk leaving 6″ free at end. Stitch through base of disk to
      hold.

3. Glue to button top. Glue free end around edge of button.

4. Glue pin back to underside of button.




                      GOLD POSY EARRINGS (page 20)


You’ll need:

  (for pair) ⅔ yds. Wright’s Loop Braid 9956, gold


To make:

1. For each earring, fold ⅓ yd. braid in half. Fold raw ends in and roll
      loosely on itself into a disk. Stitch through base of disk to
      hold.

2. Glue to earring back.

    [Illustration: See page 19 for instructions]

    [Illustration: See page 22 for instructions]




                   FULL BLOOM ROSE HAIR CLIP (page 20)


You’ll need:

  1 clip on velvet hair bow


To make:

1. See appli-tique instructions (Page 23)

2. Glue rose to center of hair bow.




                PEARL & MIDDY BRAID CIRCLE PIN (page 20)


You’ll need:

  4 yds. Wright’s Metallic Middy Braid, 9961 (P506), gold
  7 pearls, 10mm
  6″ pipe cleaner
  pin back
  gold thread


To make:

1. Cut 18″ middy braid and fold in half. Roll raw ends around pearl and
      continue rolling braid on itself to form disk. Place pin through
      end and pearl to hold. Hand tack securely. Repeat for other 6
      motifs.

2. String together thru centers and shape into circle.

3. Cut pipe cleaner to 4″. Shape into circle overlapping ¼″ and twist
      ends to hold. Wrap circle with middy braid overlapping slightly.
      Tack to back of large circle.

4. Hand tack pin back at top back of pin.




                 PEARL & MIDDY BRAID EARRINGS (page 20)


You’ll need: (for pair)

  1⅓ yds. Wright’s Metallic Middy Braid 9961 (PSO6), gold
  2 pearls, 10mm
  2 earring backs
  Gold thread


To make:

1. Repeat step 1 for matching pin

2. Glue to earring back.




                        DANGLE EARRINGS (page 20)


You’ll need: (for pair)

  2 yds. Wright’s Metallic Middy Braid 9961 (P506), gold
  2 earring backs, screw type, ¼″ diameter disk, gold
  2 loop type eyes from hook and eye set
  2 curtain rings, plastic or metal, 1″ diameter
  2 buttons, ½″ in diameter
  glue
  gold thread


To make:

1. Wind rings as given in bangle bracelet instructions.

2. Cut five 1½″ pieces middy braid for each. Glue strips criss crossing
      over entire button with joining at back. Glue button to earring
      back.

3. Cut two 6″ pieces of braid. Fold to half width and roll on itself
      into small disk. Hand tack end under. Repeat for other earring and
      glue to top of button.

4. Slip eye onto lower part of earring shank and stitch to covered ring.




                     OUTDOOR MAILBOX COVER (page 21)


You’ll need:

  3¼ yds. Wright’s Metallic Jumbo Rick Rack 9846 (P503), gold
  1¼ yds. Wright’s Metallic Braid 9882 (P511), gold
  2 yds. Wright’s Bias Tape, db. fold, 206 scarlet
  ½ yd. Oilcloth, red
  Rural delivery mailbox 19″ × 8¾″


To make:

1. Cut oilcloth 18″ × 21″. Slit on one side for mail flag.

2. Cut 2 yd. tape, stitch edges together. Cut into 6 pieces for ties.
      Stitch to oilcloth in 3 places on each 18″ side.

3. Stitch rick rack around edge of oil cloth. Stitch a row 2″ from first
      on 18″ sides. Add braid 9882 (P511) between.




                  GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR APPLI-TIQUE


Instructions are for hand stitching, however some may be glued or pinned
in place depending on the item. Use matching thread, doubled, for
stitching.


FULL BLOOM ROSE


You’ll need:

  1 yd. no. 345 (9846) Jumbo Rick Rack, for each rose.


To make:

1. Fold rick rack to half length.

2. Interlock by hooking “V’s” together.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

3. Pin to mark half the length. Fold raw end in and roll on itself up to
      pin.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

4. Tack underside to hold shape.

5. Fold down outer points and finger press.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

6. Stitch in one point and out the next along lower edge. Gather lightly
      by pulling thread.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

7. Coil gathered points around rose base twice and tack to underside.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                             RICK RACK LEAF


You’ll need:

  Regular, 429, or Jumbo, 345 Rick Rack.


To make:

1. Cut a “W” from rick rack.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

2. Seam lower “V.”

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

3. Fold in raw ends and tack. Cut away extending raw points.

4. Turn to right side.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                            ROSE BUD (Large)


You’ll need:

  ¼ yd. 345 Jumbo Rick Rack 9846 (P503).


To make:

1. Fold rick rack to half length.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

2. Interlock by hooking “V’s” together.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

3. Fold raw end in and roll on itself between fingers.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

4. Tack end and underside to hold shape.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                             FLOWER CENTERS


You’ll need:

  Use 413 Baby Rick Rack 3″. 9814 (P500)


To make:

1. There must be an even number of points along upper edge with cut ends
      in downward direction. Cut away if necessary.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

2. Stitch in one point and out the next point along upper edge, building
      all points on needle.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

3. Pull thread through leaving 3 in. free at knotted end.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

4. Tie thread together from both ends to form tight circle.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                               Footnotes


[1]Note: Pieces of costume jewelry can be used attractively as
    ornaments.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 60 NEW TRIMMED GIFT IDEAS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.