AFGHAN BOOK NO. 289    10c
                     J. & P. COATS · CLARK’S O.N.T.




                               _Afghans_


                      CHADWICK’S RED ♥ HEART YARNS

                             PERSIAN PRINT
                            C-117 ... PAGE 2

                Copyright 1952, The Spool Cotton Company
                745 Fifth Avenue, New York 22, New York
Distributors of J. & P. Coats • Clark’s O.N.T. • Chadwick’s Red Heart •
                             Crown Zippers
                       First Edition    July 1952
                        H-8124    Printed U.S.A.

    See your favorite art needlework department for latest colors in
                      Chadwick’s Red Heart Yarns.


                            _Add an Afghan_

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

to your family possessions. Almost before you finish the last stitch,
every member of the household, young and old alike, will be clamoring to
use it! Made with Chadwick’s Red Heart Yarn, your afghan will withstand
the constant usage and frequent washing imposed on it by your
comfort-conscious family.

Chadwick’s Red Heart Knitting Worsted (1 oz. “Tangle-Proof” Pull-Out
Skeins), Art. E.232, has been recommended throughout; if you wish to use
Chadwick’s Red Heart Knitting Worsted (2 oz. “Tangle-Proof” Pull-Out
Skeins), Art. E.230-B, buy half the amount.




                            _Persian Print_
                                                                   C-117


                       Illustrated on Front Cover
              Afghan measures approximately 46 x 62 inches

MATERIALS:

  CHADWICK’S RED HEART KNITTING WORSTED, 4 Ply, Art. E.232: 21 skeins (1
          oz. “Tangle-Proof” Pull-Out Skeins) of No. 789 Bittersweet and
          25 skeins of No. 858 Navy.
  Clark’s O.N.T. Plastic Crochet Hook No. 5.

GAUGE: Each motif measures 4 inches square.


FIRST MOTIF ... Starting at center with Bittersweet, ch 5. Join with sl
st to form ring. 1st rnd: Ch 3, 15 dc in ring. Join and break off. 2nd
rnd: Attach Navy to same place as sl st, sc in same place, * 2 sc in
back loop of next dc, sc in back loop of next dc. Repeat from * around.
Join and break off (24 sc). 3rd rnd: Attach Bittersweet to back loop of
first sc, sc in same place, sc in back loop of next 2 sc, * skip next
sc, in back loop of next sc make 3 dc, ch 3 and 3 dc; skip next sc, sc
in back loop of next 3 sc. Repeat from * around. Join and break off. 4th
rnd: Attach Navy to first sc, ch 3, dc in next 2 sc, * ch 3, in next sp
make sc, ch 3 and sc: ch 3, dc in next 3 sc. Repeat from * around. Join
and break off. 5th rnd: Attach Bittersweet to same place as sl st, sc in
same place, * ch 3, skip next dc, sc in next dc, (ch 3, sc in next loop)
3 times: ch 3, sc in next dc. Repeat from * around. Join and break off.
6th rnd: Attach Navy to first loop, ch 3, in same loop make 2 dc, ch 5
and 3 dc; * ch 3, skip next loop, (sc in next loop, ch 3) twice; skip
next loop, in next loop make 3 dc, ch 5 and 3 dc. Repeat from * around.
Join and break off.


SECOND MOTIF ... Work as for First Motif until 5 rnds have been
completed. 6th rnd: Attach Navy to first loop, ch 3, 2 dc in same loop,
ch 2, sl st in corresponding loop on First Motif, ch 2, 3 dc in same
loop on Second Motif, ch 1, sl st in next loop on First Motif, ch 1,
skip next loop on Second Motif, sc in next loop, ch 1, sl st in next
loop on First Motif, ch 1, sc in next loop on Second Motif, ch 1, sl st
in next loop on First Motif, ch 1, skip next loop on Second Motif, 3 dc
in next loop, ch 2, sl st in next loop on First Motif, 3 dc in same loop
on Second Motif, complete rnd as for First Motif (no more joinings).

Make 11 rows of 15 motifs, joining adjacent sides as Second Motif was
joined to First Motif (where 4 corners meet, join 3rd and 4th corners to
joining of previous 2 corners).


EDGING ... 1st rnd: Attach Navy to any corner sp, ch 3, 6 dc in same sp,
* dc in next 3 dc, 3 dc in next sp, (dc in next sc, 3 dc in next sp)
twice; dc in next 3 dc, 3 dc in next sp, dc in next joining, 3 dc in
next sp. Repeat from * around, making 7 dc in each corner sp. Join and
break off. 2nd rnd: Attach Bittersweet to same place as sl st, sc in
same place, ch 2, skip 2 dc, in next dc make sc, ch 3 and sc; * ch 2,
skip 2 dc, sc in next dc. Repeat from * around, making sc, ch 3 and sc
in center dc of each corner. Join and break off. 3rd rnd: Attach Navy to
first loop, ch 3, 4 dc in same loop, 3 dc in each sp around, making 5 dc
in each corner loop. Join and break off. Block to measurements.




                          _Television Afghan_
                                                                   C-119


                         Illustrated on page 3
              Afghan measures approximately 51 x 66 inches

MATERIALS:

  CHADWICK’S RED HEART KNITTING WORSTED, 4 Ply, Art. E.232: 14 skeins (1
          oz. “Tangle-Proof” Pull-Out Skeins) each of No. 809 Lt. Blue,
          No. 818 Blue Jewel and No. 848 Skipper Blue.
  Milwards “Phantom” Aluminum Knitting Pins or Clark’s O.N.T. Plastic
          Knitting Pins, 1 pair No. 5 (3¾ mm. size).
  Clark’s O.N.T. Plastic Crochet Hook No. 5.

GAUGE: 6 sts make 1 inch; 7 rows make 1 inch.


STRIP (Make 10) ... With Skipper Blue cast on 31 sts. 1st row: K 1, inc
1 st in next st, k 11, k 2 tog, k 1, sl 1, k 1, p.s.s.o., k 11, inc 1 st
in next st, k 1. 2nd row: P across. Repeat first and 2nd rows
alternately until 22 rows have been completed. Break off Skipper Blue,
attach Blue Jewel and work in pattern as before for 22 rows. Break off
Blue Jewel, attach Lt. Blue and work in pattern for 22 more rows. Break
off Lt. Blue. The last 66 rows constitute the pattern stripe. Continue
in this manner, alternating colors as before, until 7 pattern stripes
have been completed. Bind off.

Sew strips together and block. With matching color, make a row of sl sts
along short sides of Afghan.




                          _Television Afghan_
                                                                   C-119


                                       Size approximately 51 x 66 inches

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                           _California Ranch_
                                                                   C-120


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

                         Illustrated on page 5

MATERIALS:

  CHADWICK’S RED HEART KNITTING WORSTED, 4 Ply, Art. E.232: 48 skeins (1
          oz. “Tangle-Proof” Pull-Out Skeins) of No. 909 Scarlet and 12
          skeins of No. 1 White.
  Bone Afghan Hook No. 6 (4¼ mm. size).

GAUGE: 5 sts make 1 inch; 4 rows make 1 inch. Each strip is 5 inches
wide.


STRIP (Make 9) ... Starting at lower edge with Scarlet, ch 31. 1st row:
Insert hook in 2nd ch from hook and draw up a loop; retaining all loops
on hook draw up a loop in each of next 13 ch, insert hook in next ch
(center ch) and draw loop through, yarn over and draw through 1 loop (ch
st made), make 2 more ch sts in same place (2 sts increased), draw up a
loop in each of remaining 15 sts. There are 33 loops on hook. To
complete row, yarn over and draw through 2 loops (1 st decreased), *
yarn over and draw through 2 loops (this is not a dec). Repeat from *
across until there are 3 loops on hook, yarn over and draw through all
loops on hook (another st decreased). There are 31 sts on row. The loop
which remains on hook always counts as the first st on next row. 2nd,
3rd and 4th rows:

Insert hook under 3rd vertical bar and draw loop through; retaining all
loops on hook draw up a loop in each vertical bar across to within
center vertical bar, insert hook in st preceding center vertical bar and
draw loop through (1 st increased), insert hook under center vertical
bar and draw loop through, insert hook in st between center vertical bar
and the following vertical bar and draw loop through (another st
increased), and draw up a loop in each remaining vertical bar to within
last 2 vertical bars, insert hook under both vertical bars and draw loop
through (33 loops on hook), and complete last half of row as for first
row.

5th row: Draw a loop of White through loop on hook and drop Scarlet.
Working with White, insert hook under 3rd vertical bar and draw loop
through, * yarn over twice, insert hook under next vertical bar on 3rd
row down, yarn over and draw loop through, (yarn over and draw through 2
loops) twice (tr loop made); skip the vertical bar directly behind the
tr just completed, draw up a loop in next vertical bar on previous row.
Repeat from * 4 more times; insert hook from right of work through the
center st 3 rows down and bring it out on wrong side, yarn over and draw
loop through to height of row in work (long loop made), skip the
vertical bar directly behind this st, draw up a loop in next vertical
bar on previous row, draw up another long loop in same place as previous
long loop was made, skip the vertical bar directly behind it, insert
hook in st preceding next vertical bar (center st) on previous row and
draw loop through (1 st increased), draw up a long loop in same place as
previous long loops were drawn through, skip the center vertical bar on
previous row, insert hook in st preceding next vertical bar and draw
loop through, (draw up another long loop where previous long loops were
drawn through, skip the vertical bar on previous row directly behind
this loop, draw up a loop in next vertical bar on previous row) twice;
now make tr loops and short afghan sts alternately across to correspond
with first half of row, ending within a short afghan st, insert hook
under last 2 vertical bars and draw up a loop; make a loop on a new
strand of Scarlet, break off White, draw Scarlet loop through 2 loops on
hook and complete as for first row. This will be referred to as pattern
row. Break off the strand of Scarlet and pick up main Scarlet yarn. 6th
to 9th rows incl: Repeat 2nd to 5th rows incl. 10th, 11th and 12th rows:
Repeat 2nd, 3rd and 4th rows. 13th row: Repeat previous row, working
long and short loops alternately at center as on pattern rows. 14th to
17th rows incl: Repeat 2nd to 5th rows incl. 18th to 21st rows incl:
Repeat 10th to 13th rows incl. The 2nd to 21st rows incl constitute the
pattern. Repeat these rows until piece measures 65 inches, ending with
the 10th row. Last row: Sl st in 3rd and each vertical bar across,
working off last 2 loops as 1. Break off.

Sew strips together, matching pattern rows. Attach Scarlet to straight
side and sc closely across. Complete other side the same way.


FRINGE ... Cut 4 strands of White each 7 inches long. Double these
strands and draw through first st, draw loose ends through loop, pull
ends up tightly. Make Fringe evenly across, having a Fringe in each
point, between points and 3 Fringes on straight edges. Complete other
end to correspond.




                            _Autumn Chevron_
                                                                   C-121


                         Illustrated on page 6
                             48 x 60 inches

MATERIALS:

  CHADWICK’S RED HEART KNITTING WORSTED, 4 Ply, Art. E.232: 12 skeins (1
          oz. “Tangle-Proof” Pull-Out Skeins) each of No. 229 Lt.
          Yellow, No. 230 Yellow and No. 253 Tangerine: 10 skeins of No.
          360 Wood Brown and 8 skeins of No. 1 White; and
  CHADWICK’S RED HEART KNITTING WORSTED, 4 Ply, Art. E.245: 36 balls (⅓
          oz. balls) each of No. 243 Mid Orange.
  Clark’s O.N.T. Plastic Crochet Hook No. 6.

GAUGE: Each chevron measures 1½ inches across; 3 sc-rows make 1 inch.

STRIP ... Starting at lower edge with Wood Brown, ch 60. 1st row: Sc in
2nd ch from hook and in next 3 ch, * 3 sc in next ch, sc in next 3 ch,
(insert hook in next ch, draw loop through) 3 times; thread over and
draw through all loops on hook (2 sc decreased), sc in next 3 ch. Repeat
from * across, ending with sc in last 4 ch. Ch 1, turn. Hereafter pick
up back loop of each sc. 2nd row: Dec 1 sc—_to dec 1 sc, work off 2 sc
as 1 sc_—* sc in next 3 sc, 3 sc in next sc, sc in next 3 sc, dec 2 sc.
Repeat from * across, decreasing 1 sc over last 2 sc. Break off Wood
Brown. Attach Tangerine. Ch 1, turn. 3rd to 20th rows incl: Repeat 2nd
row, working 2 rows each of Tangerine, Mid Orange, Yellow, Lt. Yellow,
White, Lt. Yellow, Yellow, Mid Orange and Tangerine. These 20 rows
constitute stripe pattern. Work in stripe pattern until 10 stripe
patterns in all have been completed, ending with a Wood Brown stripe.
Break off.

Make 4 more strips the same way. Sew strips together neatly, matching
stripes.


EDGING ... 1st row: Attach White to end of first row on long side and sc
in end st of each row across. Break off. 2nd row: Attach Lt. Yellow to
back loop of first sc, sc in back loop of each sc across. Break off.
3rd, 4th and 5th rows: Repeat 2nd row, making a row of Yellow, Mid
Orange and Tangerine. 6th row: Attach Wood Brown to end of first row on
Edging, sc in same place, skip 1 sc on 2nd row, dc in free loop of next
sc, skip end st of next row, sc in end st of next row, skip 2 sts on
next row, tr in free loop of next sc, 3 sc in end st of last row, * dc
in free loop of next sc on row below, skip next sc on row in work, sc in
next sc, tr in free loop of next sc 2 rows below, skip next sc on row in
work, sc in next sc. Repeat from * across, working over other end of
Edging the same way. Break off. Make Edging across other long side to
correspond. Block to measurements.




                           _California Ranch_
                                                                   C-120


                     Size approximately 45 x 72 inches, including fringe

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                            _Autumn Chevron_
                                                                   C-121


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

                  Size approximately 48 x 60 inches—directions on page 4

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                                _Siesta_
                                                                   C-122


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

                 Size approximately 47 x 62 inches—directions on page 10

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                            _Sugar ’n Spice_
                                                                   C-123


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

                 Size approximately 32 x 46 inches—directions on page 12

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                              _Americana_
                                                                   C-124


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

                 Size approximately 38 x 62 inches—directions on page 10

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                              _Harlequin_
                                                                   C-125


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

                         Illustrated on page 11

MATERIALS:

  CHADWICK’S RED HEART KNITTING WORSTED, 4 Ply, Art. E.232: 19 skeins (1
          oz. “Tangle-Proof” Pull-Out Skeins) of No. 789 Bittersweet; 31
          skeins of No. 647 Surf Green.
  Milwards “Phantom” Aluminum Knitting Pins or Clark’s O.N.T. Plastic
          Knitting Pins, 1 pair No. 5 (3¾ mm. size).
  Clark’s O.N.T. Plastic Crochet Hook No. 5.

GAUGE: 5½ sts make 1 inch; 7 rows make 1 inch.

  Note: When changing from one color to another, always twist the unused
  color around the other to prevent making holes. When carrying unused
  color across, do not pull up tightly.

STRIP (Make 10) ... Starting at one short end with Surf Green, cast on
33 sts. Work in stockinette st (k 1 row, p 1 row) as follows: 1st row: K
16 Surf Green, attach Bittersweet, k 1 Bittersweet, k 16 Surf Green.
Starting with 2nd row of chart, follow chart for pattern until 13th row
has been completed. Next row: P 3 Surf Green, p 9 Bittersweet, p 4 Surf
Green, with Bittersweet, yarn over needle 4 times; p in next st on row
below, draw the last p st through each of the 4 yarn overs, p next st,
slip the previous st over the last st worked (puff st made), p 4 Surf
Green, p 9 Bittersweet, p 3 Surf Green. Continue to follow chart for
pattern until 31st row has been completed. Next row: With Surf Green p
across. Follow chart from “A” to “B” until 15 patterns have been
completed. Bind off with Surf Green.

Block strips and sew long sides together. With crochet hook and Surf
Green, work 6 rows of sc all around afghan, making 3 sc in each corner.
Join and break off.

    [Illustration: pattern]

  SURF GREEN
  BITTERSWEET
  PUFF STITCH




                                _Siesta_
                                                                   C-122


                         Illustrated on page 7
                             47 x 62 inches

MATERIALS:

  CHADWICK’S RED HEART KNITTING WORSTED, 4 Ply, Art. E.232: 16 skeins (1
          oz. “Tangle-Proof” Pull-Out Skeins) of No. 686 Paddy Green; 14
          skeins of No. 676 Emerald Green and 9 skeins of No. 647 Surf
          Green.
  Clark’s O.N.T. Plastic Crochet Hook No. 6.

GAUGE: Each motif measures 5 inches square.


MOTIF (Make 108) ... Starting at center with Paddy Green, ch 2. 1st rnd:
In 2nd ch from hook make (sc, ch 1) 8 times. Join with sl st to first
sc. 2nd rnd: Sl st in next sp, ch 3, * in next sp make (dc, ch 1) twice;
half dc in next sp, ch 1. Repeat from * around. Join to 2nd ch of ch-3.
Break off. 3rd rnd: Attach Emerald Green to same place as sl st, ch 4, *
in next sp make (dc, ch 1) twice; half dc in next sp, ch 1, in next sp
make dc, ch 1 and dc; tr in next half dc. Repeat from * around, ending
with dc, ch 1 and dc in last sp. Join to top of ch-4. Break off. 4th
rnd: Attach Surf Green to same place as sl st, sc in same place, * ch 1,
in next sp between dc’s make (dc, ch 1) twice and dc (3-dc shell made);
half dc in next half dc, in next sp between dc’s make (dc, ch 1) 3
times; sc in next tr. Repeat from * around. Join and break off. 5th rnd:
Attach Emerald Green to any half dc, sc in same place, * ch 1, sc in
first sp of shell, ch 1, sc in next sp of shell, ch 1, in next sc make
(dc, ch 1) 4 times (4-dc shell made); skip next sp, sc in first sp of
next shell, ch 1, sc in next sp of shell, ch 1, sc in next half dc.
Repeat from * around. Join and break off. 6th rnd: Attach Paddy Green to
first sp of any shell, sc in same place, * ch 1, (sc in next sp, ch 1)
twice; in next sc make half dc, ch 1 and dc; skip next sc, in next sc
make tr, ch 1, tr, ch 3, tr, ch 1 and tr; skip next sc, in next sc make
dc, ch 1 and half dc; ch 1, sc in first sp of shell. Repeat from *
around. Join and break off. Sew squares together neatly on wrong side,
making 9 rows of 12 motifs.


BORDER ... 1st rnd: Attach Paddy Green to any corner sp, 7 Sc in same
sp, sc closely around, making 7 sc in each corner sp. Join and break
off. 2nd rnd: Attach Surf Green to first sc, ch 3, dc in back loop of
each sc around, making 5 dc in center sc of each corner. Join and break
off. 3rd rnd: Attach Emerald Green to same place as sl st, ch 3, dc in
back loop of each dc around, making 5 dc in center dc of each corner.
Join and break off. 4th rnd: Attach Paddy Green to same place as sl st,
sc in same place, sc in back loop of each dc around. Join and break off.
Block to measurements.




                              _Americana_
                                                                   C-124


                         Illustrated on page 9
                             38 x 62 inches

MATERIALS:

  CHADWICK’S RED HEART KNITTING WORSTED, 4 Ply, Art. E.232: 19 skeins (1
          oz. “Tangle-Proof” Pull-Out Skeins) of No. 1 White; 18 skeins
          of No. 858 Navy and 13 skeins of No. 909 Scarlet.
  Clark’s O.N.T. Plastic Crochet Hook No. 5.

GAUGE: Each motif measures 4 inches square.


FIRST MOTIF (Make 68) ... Starting at center with White, ch 6. Join with
sl st to form ring. 1st rnd: Ch 3, 15 dc in ring. Join to top of ch-3.
Break off. 2nd rnd: Attach Scarlet to same place as sl st, 3 sc in same
place, * sc in next 3 dc, 3 sc in next dc. Repeat from * around. Join
and break off. 3rd rnd: Attach White to first sc, sc in same place, * at
base of 3-sc group make dc, ch 2 and dc (2 long dc made); sc in 3rd sc
of same sc group, (make a long dc over next sc, sc in next sc) twice.
Repeat from * around. Join and break off. 4th rnd: Attach Navy to corner
sp, in same sp make sc, ch 2 and sc; sc in each sc and in each dc
around, making sc, ch 2 and sc in each corner sp. Join and break off.
5th rnd: Attach White to corner sp, sc in same sp, make long dc in same
sp; * (sc in next sc, long dc over next sc) 3 times; sc in next sc, in
corner sp make long dc, 2 sc and long dc. Repeat from * around. Join and
break off. 6th rnd: Attach Scarlet to first sc, (yarn over, insert hook
in same sc, draw loop through) 3 times; yarn over and draw through all
loops on hook, ch 1 to fasten (puff st made), * make a puff st in each
of next 5 sc, in next sc make puff st, ch 2 and puff st. Repeat from *
around, ending with puff st in same place as first puff st, ch 2. Join
and break off.

                                             _Continuation from page 12_


SECOND MOTIF (Make 67) ... Work as for First Motif, reversing Scarlet
and Navy rnds.

To Join Blocks: Starting and ending with a Scarlet Block, sew 5 Scarlet
and 4 Navy Blocks together to form first strip. Starting and ending with
a Navy Block, sew 5 Navy and 4 Scarlet Blocks together to form second
strip. Sew remaining blocks together in alternate pattern as before. Sew
strips together.

BORDER ... 1st rnd: Attach Navy to any corner sp, make a puff st, ch 2
and puff st in same sp, make a puff st in each sp around, making puff
st, ch 2 and puff st in each corner sp. Join. 2nd rnd: Sl st in corner
sp and work as for first rnd. Join and break off. Block to measurements.




                              _Harlequin_
                                                                   C-125


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

                                       Size approximately 62 x 70 inches

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                            _Highland Home_
                                                                   C-126


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

                         Illustrated on page 13

MATERIALS:

  CHADWICK’S RED HEART KNITTING WORSTED, 4 Ply, Art. E.232: 36 skeins (1
          oz. “Tangle-Proof” Pull-Out Skeins) of No. 12 Black; 24 skeins
          of No. 909 Scarlet and 3 skeins of No. 230 Yellow.
  Clark’s O.N.T. Plastic Crochet Hook No. 3.

GAUGE: 3 sps make 1 inch; 2½ rows make 1 inch.


WIDE STRIP (Make 4) ... Starting at narrow edge with Black, ch 68. 1st
row: Dc in 6th ch from hook, * ch 1, skip 1 ch, dc in next ch. Repeat
from * across (32 sps). Ch 4, turn. 2nd row: Skip first dc, * dc in next
dc, ch 1. Repeat from * across, ending with dc in last dc, ch 1, skip 1
ch of turning chain, dc in next ch. Ch 4, turn. Repeat 2nd row 5 more
times, omitting turning chain on last row. Drop Black, attach Yellow.
Next row: Ch 4 and work in pattern across. Break off Yellow. Following
row: Pick up Black, ch 4 and work in pattern across. Ch 4, turn. Work in
pattern with Black for 6 more rows. Break off. Attach Scarlet and work
in pattern for 3 rows, omitting turning chain on last row. Drop Scarlet,
attach Black and work in pattern across. Break off. Pick up Scarlet,
(make 3 Scarlet rows, 1 Black row) 3 times and 3 Scarlet rows. Break off
Scarlet. Attach Black and make another Black Section with Yellow stripe
as before. Continue in this manner, making Black and Scarlet sections
alternately until 11 sections in all have been completed (6 Black and 5
Scarlet).


NARROW STRIP (Make 1) ... With Black, ch 38. 1st row: Work as for first
row of Wide Strip (17 sps). Work in color pattern exactly as for Wide
Strip.


WEAVING ... Place Afghan lengthwise on a curtain stretcher—it will be
easier to handle this way. However, it may be done without the use of a
curtain stretcher.

Cut 2 strands of Black each 80 inches long, thread these strands into a
bodkin and weave in and out through first row of sps, leaving enough
yarn free at each end to make fringe. Cut 2 more strands of Black and
weave through same row of sps, going under rows that were passed over
previously. Weave Black through next 7 rows the same way. Make 1 row of
Yellow and 8 Black. This completes 1 Black Section. Now make (3 rows of
Scarlet, 1 row of Black) 3 times and 3 rows of Scarlet. This completes 1
Scarlet Section. Continue to work in pattern, alternating Scarlet and
Black Sections until all sps have been filled.

Remove from curtain stretcher. Knot first 12 strands together to make a
fringe. Make fringe, knotting every 12 strands across. Complete other
end to correspond. Trim ends evenly. Block to measurements.




                            _Sugar ’n Spice_
                                                                   C-123


                         Illustrated on page 8—32 x 46 inches

MATERIALS:

  CHADWICK’S RED HEART BABY WOOL, 3 Ply, Shrink-and-Stretch Resist
          Finish, Art. E.275: 20 skeins (¾ oz. “Tangle-Proof” Pull-Out
          Skeins) of No. 1 White; 3 skeins each of No. 679 Nile Green,
          No. 802 Baby Blue and 2 skeins each of No. 723 Baby Pink and
          No. 261 Maize; or
  CHADWICK’S RED HEART NYLON, 3 Ply, Shrink-and-Moth Proof, Art. E.260:
          15 skeins (1 oz. “Tangle-Proof” Pull-Out Skeins) of No. 1
          White and 2 skeins each of No. 679 Nile Green, No. 802 Baby
          Blue, No. 723 Baby Pink and No. 261 Maize.
  Clark’s O.N.T. Plastic Crochet Hook No. 5.

  Use yarn double throughout.

GAUGE: Each motif measures 3½ inches square.


COLOR MOTIF ... Starting at center with Nile Green, ch 2. 1st rnd: 8 sc
in 2nd ch from hook, drop loop from hook. Hereafter work in back loop
only. 2nd rnd: Leaving Green loop free, attach White to first sc, sc in
same place, * 3 sc in next sc, sc in next sc. Repeat from * around,
ending with 3 sc in last Green sc, drop White. 3rd rnd: Pick up Green
loop and, leaving White loop free, sc in each sc around, making 3 sc in
center sc of each 3-sc group, drop Green. 4th rnd: Pick up White and
repeat last rnd. 5th, 6th and 7th rnds: Work as for last rnd,
alternating colors, ending with a Green rnd. Join and break off. Make 17
more Green Motifs, 17 Blue and 12 each of Pink and Maize (59 color
motifs).


WHITE MOTIF (Make 58) ... Work as for Color Motif, using White only.

Sew motifs together neatly on wrong side, joining colors as follows:


FIRST ROW ... Sew together (1 Green, 1 White, 1 Blue, 1 White) 3 times
and 1 Green Motif (13 Motifs on row).


SECOND ROW ... Sew together (1 White, 1 Pink, 1 White, 1 Maize) 3 times
and 1 White Motif. Sew First and Second Rows together.


THIRD ROW ... Sew together (1 Blue, 1 White, 1 Green, 1 White) 3 times
and 1 Blue Motif. Sew Third Row to Second Row.


FOURTH ROW ... Sew together (1 White, 1 Maize, 1 White, 1 Pink) 3 times
and 1 White Motif. Sew Fourth Row to Third Row.

Repeat first 4 rows once more, then First Row once again, joining as
before.


BORDER ... 1st rnd: Attach White to back loop of any sc on long side, sc
closely around, making 3 sc in center sc of each 3-sc group at corners.
Join. 2nd rnd: Sc in back loop of each sc around. Join and break off.
Block to measurements.




                            _Highland Home_
                                                                   C-126


          Size approximately 50 x 64 inches, including fringe

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                            _Flower Garden_
                                                                   C-127


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

                   Size approximately 48 x 64 inches

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                            _Flower Garden_
                                                                   C-127


                         Illustrated on page 14

MATERIALS:

  CHADWICK’S RED HEART KNITTING WORSTED, 4 Ply, Art. E.232: 34 skeins (1
          oz. “Tangle-Proof” Pull-Out Skeins) of No. 491 Pearl Grey: 10
          skeins of No. 230 Yellow and 12 skeins of assorted colors.
  Clark’s O.N.T. Plastic Crochet Hook No. 5.

GAUGE: Each motif measures 3¼ inches square.


MOTIF (Make 266) ... Starting at center with Yellow, ch 4. 1st rnd: 15
dc in 4th ch from hook. Join with sl st to top of ch-3. 2nd rnd: Attach
desired color to same place as sl st, ch 3, holding back on hook the
last loop of each dc, make 2 dc in same place, thread over and draw
through all loops on hook (cluster made), * ch 3, skip next dc, 3-dc
cluster in next dc. Repeat from * around. Join to tip of first cluster.
Break off. 3rd rnd: Attach Grey to any sp, ch 3, 4 dc in same sp, 5 dc
in each remaining sp around. Join. 4th rnd: Ch 5, dc in same place as sl
st, * ch 1, skip next dc, half dc in next dc, (ch 1, skip next dc, sc in
next dc) twice; ch 1, skip next dc, half dc in next dc, ch 1, skip next
dc, in next dc make dc, ch 3 and dc. Repeat from * around. Join and
break off. Sew motifs neatly together on wrong side, having 14 rows of
19 motifs.


BORDER ... 1st rnd: Attach Yellow to any corner, ch 3, 4 dc in same
corner, dc closely around, making 5 dc in each corner. Join and break
off. 2nd rnd: Attach Grey to same place as sl st, ch 3, dc in each dc
around, making 5 dc in center dc of each 5-dc group. Join and break off.
Block to measurements.




                            _Colonial Charm_
                                                                   C-118


                       Illustrated on Back Cover
              Afghan measures approximately 44 x 64 inches

MATERIALS:

  CHADWICK’S RED HEART SOCK AND SWEATER YARN, 3 Ply, Shrink-and-Stretch
          Resist Finish, Art. E.255: 9 skeins (1 oz. “Tangle-Proof”
          Pull-Out Skeins) of No. 12 Black, 7 skeins of No. 686 Paddy
          Green: 5 skeins of No. 230 Yellow and 7 skeins of assorted
          colors.
  Clark’s O.N.T. Plastic Crochet Hook No. 4.

GAUGE: Each motif measures 4 inches from point to point.


FIRST MOTIF ... Starting at center with Black, ch 5. Join with sl st to
form ring. 1st rnd: 12 sc in ring. Join and break off. 2nd rnd: Attach
Yellow to first sc, ch 3, dc in same sc, 2 dc in each sc around. Join
and break off. 3rd rnd: Attach Black to same place as sl st, sc in same
place, sc in back loop of each dc around. Join and break off. 4th rnd:
Attach any color of assorted colors to first sc, sc in same place, * sl
st in next sc, ch 3, (yarn over, insert hook in same sc, draw loop
through) 3 times; yarn over and draw through all loops on hook (puff st
made), ch 3, sl st in same sc, sc in next sc. Repeat from * around. Join
and break off. 5th rnd: Attach Black to ch-3 preceding any puff st, sc
in same place, * ch 3, sc in next ch 3, ch 1, dc in next sc, ch 1, sc in
next ch 3. Repeat from * around. Join and break off. 6th rnd: Attach
Paddy Green to any dc, sc in same place, * ch 3, sc in next ch-3 loop,
ch 3, in next dc make dc, ch 3 and dc; ch 3, sc in next ch-3 loop, ch 3,
sc in next dc. Repeat from * around. Join and break off.


SECOND MOTIF ... Work as for First Motif until 5 rnds have been
completed. 6th rnd: Attach Paddy Green to any dc, sc in same place, ch
3, sc in next ch-3 loop, ch 3, dc in next dc, ch 1, sl st in
corresponding loop on First Motif, ch 1, dc in same dc on Second Motif,
ch 3, sc in next ch-3 loop, ch 1, sl st in corresponding loop on First
Motif, ch 1, sc in next dc on Second Motif, ch 1, sl st in next loop on
First Motif, ch 1, sc in next ch-3 loop on Second Motif, ch 3, dc in
next dc and join next corner loop as before. Complete rnd (no more
joinings).

Make 13 rows of 16 Motifs, joining adjacent sides as shown on chart as
Second Motif was joined to First Motif (where 3 corners meet, join 3rd
corner to joining of previous 2 corners).

    [Illustration: pattern]

EDGING ... 1st rnd: Attach Paddy Green to corner sp of any side motif,
ch 3, in same sp make dc, ch 3 and 2 dc; * 3 dc in each of next 4 sps,
holding back on hook the last loop of each dc make a dc in next 2 joined
loops, thread over and draw through all loops on hook (joint-dc made), 3
dc in each of next 4 sps, in next sp make 2 dc, ch 2 and 2 dc. Repeat
from * around, making joint-dc over each joining and 2 dc, ch 3 and 2 dc
in each corner loop. Join and break off. 2nd rnd: Attach Yellow to same
place as sl st, sc in back loop of next dc, sc in next 3 ch, * sc in
back loop of each dc to within 1 dc of next joint-dc, holding back on
hook the last loop of each sc make sc in next dc, skip next joint-dc, sc
in next dc, thread over and draw through all loops on hook (1 sc
decreased). Repeat from * around, decreasing 1 sc over each joint-dc and
making sc in each ch of ch-3. Join and break off. 3rd rnd: Attach Black
to same place as sl st, sc in same place, sc in back loop of next 2 sc,
3 sc in back loop of next sc, sc in back loop of each sc around,
decreasing 1 sc over previous decreases as before and making 3 sc in
center sc of each point. Join and break off. 4th rnd: Attach Yellow and
repeat last rnd. 5th rnd: Attach Green to same place as sl st, ch 3, dc
in back loop of each sc around, making 3 dc in center sc of each point
and decreasing 1 dc over previous decreases as before. Join and break
off. Block to measurements.


Abbreviations

  ch            chain
  sc            single crochet
  half dc       half double crochet
  dc            double crochet
  tr            treble
  d tr          double treble
  sl st         slip stitch
  sp            space
  sts           stitches
  rnd           round
  incl          inclusive
  inc           increase
  dec           decrease
  k             knit
  p             purl
  sl            slip
  tog           together
  p.s.s.o.      pass slipped stitch over knit stitch

* (asterisk) ... Repeat the instructions following the asterisk as many
times as specified.


Repeat instructions in parentheses as many times as specified. For
example: “(Ch 5, sc in next sc) 5 times” means to make all that is in
parentheses 5 times in all.

    [Illustration: COLONIAL CHARM
    C-188 ... PAGE 15]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AFGHANS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.