[Illustration:

THE ABERGELDIE WINTER BOOK

BY M^{LLE} RIEGO.]




THE

ABERGELDIE WINTER BOOK.

BY

MLLE. RIEGO DE LA BRANCHARDIERE.

BY SPECIAL APPOINTMENT ARTISTE IN NEEDLEWORK
TO H. R. H. THE PRINCESS OF WALES.


LONDON: SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, AND CO.;
AND ALL THE BERLIN WAREHOUSES.

1867.

Price One Shilling.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

Prize Medal, 1851.

Prize Medal, 1862.

Prize Medal, 1862.

Prize Medal, 1855.

AWARDED

“FOR THE SKILL DISPLAYED IN THE IMITATION OF OLD SPANISH
    AND OTHER COSTLY LACES.”

        SEE JURORS’ REPORT, INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

CAPE    MUFF    CROSS-OVER

VESTE    PETTICOAT    HOOD]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE
ABERGELDIE WINTER BOOK.




OPERA HOOD.

IN CROCHET, ORNAMENTED WITH TATTING.

See the Frontispiece.


    _Materials—16 skeins of Pink and the same of White single
    Berlin Wool; 3 skeins of White Floss Silk. Walker’s Tricot
    Needle No. 5 Bell gauge._

    _The Tatting—A large Shuttle, and for the pearl loops a short
    mesh, which measures 1¾ inches in circumference, and another 1¼
    round, are required._


THE CROWN.

Commence with the White wool and the Tricot needle; make a chain of 15
stitches. The whole of the stitches should be worked very loosely.

1st row—Miss the last 4 chain stitches, and work a plain crochet
stitch into the next stitch of the foundation chain; then (make 2
chain, miss a stitch of the foundation and work 1 plain crochet stitch,
5 times); turn back.

2nd row—Make 2 chain, miss 2, and work 1 plain stitch in the 2 chain
of the last row; repeat to the end, then to Increase work 2 chain and 1
plain again in the last loop; turn back.

Work 7 rows more, the same as the last, when it will be increased to 14
loops. It should measure seven inches across without stretching.

Work 9 rows of the same stitch, but omitting the increased loops at the
end of the rows.

19th row—To decrease, miss the last stitch and work 1 plain in the
last loop of chain; then 2 chain and 1 plain as before, to the end.

Work 8 rows more as the last. Then work a row of 1 chain and 1 plain in
each loop.

Join on the Colored wool, and work a row of plain crochet all round,
working two stitches to the side of each of the white rows.

For the second round—Work 4 chain, miss 1 and 1 plain. Repeat and
fasten off.

Use the Floss Silk and an Embroidery Needle. Work an ordinary Cross
stitch over each of the plain stitches of the Crown, putting the needle
into the open spaces.


THE TATTING FLOWERS.

1st CIRCLE—Wind the colored and White Wool together, and fill the
Shuttle with it, using the doubled wool as one thread.

Commence a loop, work a double stitch; then using the largest mesh for
the pearl loops, work (1 pearl and 1 double alternately 16 times); draw
close; leaving a small circle in the centre about the size of the 2nd
mesh, and knotting the ends firmly together, cut them off.

2nd CIRCLE—Use the colored wool doubled, and the second sized mesh.
Commence a loop, work 1 double, then (1 pearl and 1 double 12 times);
draw close and fasten off.

3rd CIRCLE—Use the White Floss, and for the pearl loops the Tricot
needle can be used. Commence a loop; work 1 double, (1 pearl and 2
double 8 times); draw close. Fasten off.

Place the second circle over the first, and the silk one in the centre,
sewing them together with the silk, then attach them to the crown about
an inch from the edge of it.

Make nine Flowers for the Crown and four for the Lappets.


THE LAPPETS.

Work with the White wool and Tricot needle. Make a chain of 11 stitches.

1st row—Raise 11 loops in the ordinary Tricot stitch, and work back,
see page 28.

2nd row—Raise a loop, Increase a loop, raise 2 loops; then to
_decrease_, put the needle into the three next stitches, and bring the
wool through them all. Raise the 2 next loops as before. Increase
again, and raise the 2 last loops. There will be 11 loops on the
needle. Work back as before. Work 8 rows more as the last.

11th row—Raise the 1st stitch and increase a loop as before; then
decrease the two next stitches, taking them together as one stitch;
take the next three loops together; then take the two next loops
together as one stitch, then Increase a loop as before, and raise the
two last loops. There will now be 9 loops. Work back.

12th row—Raise a loop and increase as before; raise the next loop,
then take 3 together, raise a loop, increase, raise 2 loops. Work back.
Work 8 rows more as the last.

21st row—Raise a loop and increase as before; then put the needle into
the next 5 loops, and bring the wool through them all as one stitch;
increase again and raise 2 loops: there will now be 7 loops. Work back.

22nd row—Raise a loop and increase; then take the next 3 loops
together; increase and raise 2 loops. Work back. Work 20 rows more as
the last, or any length preferred.

THE EDGE—With the colored wool, work loosely a row of plain crochet
all round the lappet, putting the needle into the spaces formed by the
increased stitches. 2 chain and an extra plain stitch should be made at
the two ends and centre of the first white row.

Make sufficient of the Scallop Trimming, page 11, to go round the
Lappet, using the colored wool doubled, and the smaller mesh for the
pearl loops. For the crochet row the wool is to be single.

THE JOINING—work with the Floss Silk, which had better be used double.
Commence at the colored row, round the Lappet, and work a plain crochet
stitch; then take out the needle and put it into the last stitch of the
Scallop Trimming, taking both edges of the plain row, bring the Floss
through; then work another plain stitch on the lappet, taking both
edges, continue joining and working a plain stitch alternately.

Work a row of Cross stitches with the Floss silk up the centre.

Make the other Lappet the same, sew them to the crown and attach two
flowers at each side.




MAZARIN CAPE.


    _Materials—For the Cape, 4 ounces of single or double Wool,
    and for the Trimmings 3 skeins of double Berlin Wool of a color
    which contrasts; Walker’s Tricot Needle No. 7 Bell gauge, a
    large Tatting Shuttle, and a round Mesh No. 1 Bell gauge._


This Cape is worked in open Crochet ornamented with Tatting, see the
Frontispiece.

It will be greatly improved if Floss Silk is introduced as described in
the Opera Hood. The centre should then be white with colored Trimming,
but any two colors that contrast will look well, as Pearl Grey with
Crimson, Mauve with Amber, or Violet with Grey.


THE DIVISIONS.

Commence with the Wool for the centre, and make 15 chain stitches.

1st row—Miss the last 4 chain and work a plain crochet stitch in the
next stitch; (then 2 chain, miss 1 and 1 plain, 5 times); turn back. It
should measure 3 inches in length without stretching. If single Wool is
used it should be worked loosely.

2nd row—Work 3 chain, miss 1 and 1 treble in the last 2 chain; then 2
chain, miss 2 and 1 plain in each loop of 2 chain to the end; turn back.

3rd row—Work the same as the 2nd row.

4th row—3 chain, miss 1, 1 treble in the last loop of chain; then 2
chain, miss 2, and 1 plain as before to the end; and to Increase a loop
work 3 chain and 1 plain in the same loop as the last plain stitch;
turn back.

5th row—Work the same as the 4th row.

Repeat the last 4 rows 6 times more. As the work will increase two
loops every four rows there will now be 20 loops. It is intended that
the work should be longer at the sides than in the centre of the
division.

30th row—3 chain, miss 1 and 1 treble; then 2 chain, miss 2 and 1
plain as before, for 7 loops, then work 5 loops, making only 1 chain
instead of 2 chain; then work 7 loops with 2 chain, and increase in the
last loop.

31st row—3 chain, miss 1, 1 treble, then work 7 loops with 2 chain; 6
loops with 1 chain, and 7 loops of 2 chain; then increase at the end.

32nd row—Work 1 chain, miss 1 and 1 plain in each loop of chain to the
end; then 1 chain and 1 plain in the last loop. Work 2 rows more as the
last, and fasten off.

Work five Divisions more the same, and sew the slanting sides of them
together. Three rounds of 1 chain, miss 1 and 1 plain, should be worked
along the neck, then commencing at the right point work a plain row up
the front, across the neck, and down the other side.


THE TRIMMING IN TATTING.

THE ROSETTE—Fill the Shuttle with the Wool and using the mesh for the
pearl loops, commence a loop, work 1 double, (then make a pearl and
work a double stitch alternately for 7 loops); draw close. Keep the
Wool at the back and join it to the centre pearl.

Work another Rosette the same, and join it to the same pearl of the
previous Rosette as before; then keep the Wool as the back and join to
the centre pearl of the last Rosette. Repeat the last Rosette until
sufficient is made for the sides and border, to which it is to be
attached by sewing it with the same colored Wool.

The Rosettes down the Divisions are made in the same manner, but as
they are to be smaller, only 5 pearls instead of 7 pearls are to be
made for each Rosette.

THE BALLS—Take a yard of the Wool the same color as the Tatting, split
it three times, and wind it round the tops of the first and second
fingers, take it off the fingers and wind a piece of fine thread about
three times very tightly round the middle of the wool, knotting the
ends together, also tie in a piece of the wool not split, to form the
thread to attach the Balls to the work; cut the wool at each end,
rounding it into the shape.

Make sufficient of these Balls to go all round the Edge, placing them
about two inches apart.




RETICULE MUFF.

IN TRICOT ECOSSAIS.—SEE FRONTISPIECE.


    _Materials—4 skeins of Scarlet and 2 of Black double Berlin
    Wool, or 4-ply Fleecy, Walker’s Tricot Needle No. 6 Bell gauge._


Commence the Outside with the Black wool, and make a chain of 34
stitches. See Instructions for this stitch page 28.

1st row—Miss the last chain stitch. * Put the needle into the next
chain stitch, and bring the wool through it in a loop. Repeat from *
until there are 34 loops on the needle. Then join on the scarlet wool,
and “Work Back.” Join on the black wool.

2nd row—Work with the Black wool, and raise all the loops of the last
row; then join on the scarlet wool and Work back.

Repeat as the last row until 16 inches are worked; then, to shape the
Flap or part which falls over the pocket, work the same stitch, but
decreasing at the beginning and end of every row by taking two stitches
together until it is reduced to a point.


THE LINING.

Work with the Scarlet wool and make a piece the same as the outside;
when finished it is to be made round by joining the foundation row to
the one before the flap is begun, so as to leave it on the outside.

For the Pocket take a piece of merino or silk the length of the muff,
and about 8 inches deep double it, and sew the double part to the
Lining 4 inches below the joining; then sew one edge of the silk to the
joining. Wadding is to be placed between the lining and the outside,
which is now to be sewn at the sides and round the flap, but the
foundation row is to be joined to the other edge of the pocket. Finish
with a Fur Trimming or Border, as given in the Winter Book, 1862, round
the end and flap, which must be secured with a loop and button.




CROSSOVER SHAWL.

IN TRICOT ECOSSAIS, WITH TATTING BORDER.

See the Frontispiece.


    _Materials—For the Tricot, 6 ounces of Mauve, Blue, or Magenta
    4-ply Fleecy, Walker’s Tricot Needle No. 3 Bell gauge. Berlin
    Wool 8-ply can be used, or 3-ply Fleecy._

    _For the Border, a skein of Black and two of White double
    Berlin Wool, a large Shuttle, and a Mesh No. 1 Bell gauge._


THE BACK.

Commence with the Colored Fleecy, and the Tricot Needle. Make a chain
of 7 stitches.

1st row—Miss the last chain stitch. * Put the needle into the next
stitch, and bring the wool through in a loop. Repeat from * until there
are 7 loops on the needle. Work back. See Instructions, page 28, at the
end of the book.

2nd row—Raise the 7 loops of the 1st row, and work back.

3rd row—Raise a loop, then Increase a loop by putting the needle
between the upright stitches; Raise 3 loops as usual; then Increase
another loop; raise the 2 last loops. Work back.

4th row—Raise a loop, Increase, raise 5 loops, increase again, raise 2
loops. Work back.

5th Row—Raise a loop, increase, raise 7 loops, increase again, raise 2
loops. Work back.

6th row—Raise a loop, increase, then raise all the loops to within two
of the end; increase again, and raise the two last loops. Work back.
The work should be loose. As a guide for the size of the stitch, the
last row should measure 4 inches across, and these 6 rows 2½ inches in
depth.

Work 5 rows more the same as the 6th row.

12th row—Raise all the loops without increasing, and work back.

Work 4 rows as the 6th row, that is increasing 2 stitches each row, and
then work every 5th row without increasing until 37 rows in all are
worked, when there will be 65 stitches.

Work 4 rows without shaping. If for an extra size a few more rows
may be added here, and also at the plain rows on each shoulder. This
finishes the back.

TO SHAPE THE RIGHT FRONT—1st row—Raise all the loops of the last row
until there are 28 on the needle. Work back.

2nd and 3rd rows—Raise all the loops to the two last, then decrease by
taking these loops together as one stitch. Work back.

4th row—Raise a loop, then decrease as before, raise the rest to the
end. Work back.

Then work 4 rows plain without shaping.

Repeat as the 4th row, and the 4 rows plain after it, 5 times more;
that is decreasing a stitch at the beginning of every 5th row; the left
selvedge should be quite straight.

Then to shape the end, decrease a stitch at the beginning and end of
every 3rd row, until it is reduced to a point.

TO SHAPE THE LEFT FRONT—1st row—Commence at the stitches left at the
back, and leaving 9 for the neck, raise the remaining 28 loops as
usual. Work back.

2nd and 3rd rows—Work 2 rows, decreasing a loop at the beginning of
each row. All the rows must now be kept straight at the beginning.

Work 4 rows plain, and at the end of every 5th row decrease a stitch,
in all 6 times. Then decrease a stitch at the beginning and end of
every 3rd row until it is reduced to a point.


THE TATTING BORDER.

THE DOT—Fill the Shuttle with the White Wool, and use the Tricot Needle
for the pearl loops. Commence a loop, work 3 double stitches, then (1
pearl loop and 3 double stitches twice); draw quite close and reverse
the work.

Commence the next Dot close to the last and repeat the dot, reversing
them after each is made. Work sufficient to go all round the Tricot.

THE EDGE—Work with the Black Wool, and commencing at the last pearl of
the Dots, crochet a plain stitch in it; then work another plain stitch
in the next pearl of the same Dot, and missing the Dot which turns
down, work a plain stitch in the 1st pearl of the next dot but one.
Repeat working a plain stitch in the two pearls of every other dot.

THE JOINING—Work with the Black wool, and commencing at the left corner
of the Tricot, work a plain crochet stitch between the rows of it;
then, to join the Tatting, take out the needle, put it into a pearl of
a Dot, and bringing the loop through work a plain stitch on the Tricot,
and continue the same until the Tatting is joined. To round the corners
so that the Border may lie flat, the needle should be put into the
last pearl of one dot and the 1st pearl of the next, and worked as one
stitch. This should be done five or six times. With the same colored
wool as the Tricot, make sufficient of the Scalloped Trimming to go all
round, and join it to the black row of the Border with the black wool,
always putting the needle into both edges of the plain rows.




TATTING SCALLOP TRIMMING.


    _Materials—The edging being used to ornament more than one of
    the patterns in this book, the materials are given with each
    article._

THE SCALLOPS—Fill the Shuttle with the Wool, and commencing a loop work
2 double stitches, then with the Mesh or pin (make a pearl loop and
work a double stitch alternately, until 6 loops are made); then work
another double stitch and draw the loop nearly close, leaving a space
in the centre the size of the Mesh.

Leave three-quarters of an inch of Wool before commencing the next
Scallop. Continue them until the length is made.

Work with the Tricot Needle; take the Tatting and, keeping the straight
edge at the top, work a plain Crochet stitch in the last pearl of the
Scallop; then work 2 plain in the space in the centre of the Scallop
and 1 plain in the last pearl. The thread which connects the Scallops
is to be worked under these stitches. Continue working 4 plain stitches
to each Scallop.




GENTLEMAN’S SOCK OR HALF-HOSE.

RIBBED KNITTING.


    _Materials—4 ounces of plain or speckled Fingering Yarn, and 1
    ounce of a contrasting color for the top and toe. 5 Knitting
    Needles No. 17 Bell gauge_.


The following directions will make a full-sized Stocking, viz—12 inches
round the top of the leg, 12 inches in length from the top to the heel,
and 11 inches long in the foot. By using Needles Nos. 16 or 18 it will
make a size larger or smaller.

THE LEG—Use the color for the top—Cast on 24 stitches on each of four
needles, keeping the fifth to make it round.

1st round—Pearl 3 stitches and knit 3 stitches alternately all round;
in all 96 stitches.

Work 30 rounds or two inches more the same, always knitting or pearling
the same stitches throughout the leg.—With the other color, knit 8
inches more the same.

TO SHAPE THE HEEL—Knit 23 stitches plain off the 1st needle which
leaves a stitch, and putting it on the 2nd needle turn back, so as to
work on the 23 stitches. Slip the 1st stitch and pearl the 22 stitches,
then, using the same needle, pearl 20 stitches off the next needle,
which leaves 4 stitches; put them on the next needle and turn back. The
53 stitches on the other needles are left for the Instep.

1st row—Slip the 1st stitch, knit 20, pearl 1, knit 21; turn back.

2nd row—Slip 1, pearl 42 stitches; turn back.

Repeat the 2 last rows 22 times more.

TO ROUND THE HEEL. 47th row—Slip 1, knit 15, knit 2 together, knit 6,
knit 2 together, knit 1, turn back, leaving 16 stitches on the other
needle.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

MUFFATEE.    GENTLEMAN’S SOCK.    BABY’S BOOT.

LADY’S STOCKING.    SLEEPING SOCK.]

       *       *       *       *       *

48th row—Slip 1, pearl 10, turn back, leaving 14 stitches—slip 1, knit
2 together, knit 7, knit 2 together, knit 1, turn back; † slip 1,
pearl 12, that is, 2 stitches on those left unworked, turn back—slip
1, knit 2 together, knit 9, knit 2 together, knit 1, turn back. Repeat
from † 6 times more, always knitting or pearling 2 stitches more each
time, so as every row to use two of the stitches left unworked; when
finished, there will be 25 stitches on the needle.

THE INSTEP—Commence at the end of the 53 stitches left unworked, and
with another needle raise 23 stitches from the selvedge formed by the
rows at the right side of the heel.

Take another needle, and knit the 25 stitches left from the heel.

Then with the 5th needle, raise 23 stitches down the selvedge of the
left side of the heel, and with the same needle knit off the first
plain stitch of the 53. Put 51 of these instep stitches on one needle,
and place the remaining stitch on the next needle to the left. It will
now be 124 stitches round.

1st round—Work across the instep. (Pearl 3 and knit 3, alternately
as before, 8 times) then pearl 3; knit 1, knit 2 together, knit 67
_plain_; then knit 2 together, knit 1 plain.

2nd round—(Pearl 3 and knit 3, 8 times), pearl 3, knit the rest of the
round all plain.

Repeat these two rounds 16 times more, knitting 2 stitches less at the
stitches marked in italics each time.

Then knit 50 rounds the same as the 2nd round; when finished knit 20
rounds all plain.

THE TOE—Join on the other color and decrease thus—

1st round—Knit 2 together, knit 37 plain, knit 2 together, knit 4
plain. Repeat once more to finish the round.

2nd round—All plain.

Repeat the 2 last rounds 16 times more, knitting 2 plain less each time
instead of 37.

Place the remaining stitches together so as to double the work, and
knitting a stitch off each needle together, cast off the remaining
stitches.




A SLEEPING SOCK.

KNITTING.—SEE PAGE 13.


    _Materials—For a Lady, 2 skeins of white 3-ply Fleecy, and a
    pair of knitting pins, No. 12 Bell gauge; for a Gentleman the
    pins must be No. 10._

Commence at the sole. Cast on 28 stitches.

1st row—Slip 1, then increase a stitch by knitting the next stitch, but
before taking it off the left pin, put the needle into the back of the
same stitch and knit it off the pin; knit the rest of the row plain.
Work 9 rows more the same.

Then work 18 rows, increasing in the same way at the beginning of every
alternate row only, which will make one side slant more than the other;
there will now be 47 stitches.

Knit 6 rows plain, always slipping the 1st stitch.

TO FORM THE INSTEP—Slip 1, knit 29, turn back, leaving 17 stitches on
the pin: and on the 30 stitches knit 26 rows plain. The wool will be at
the side nearest the stitches left, and with it cast 17 stitches on the
pin with the 30 stitches, in all 47 stitches; and for the other side of
the sole, knit 6 rows plain.

Next row—Slip 1, knit 2 together, knit the rest plain. Then knit a row
plain. Work the last two rows 8 times more. Then 10 rows, decreasing
every row, and cast off.

THE LEG—Return to the stitches left, and with the same pin raise 14
stitches from the selvedge formed by the rows across the instep, thus:
put the pin into the nearest stitch at the edge, and bring the wool
through in a loop on it; then in the same manner raise 17 stitches from
the stitches cast on; there will now be 48 stitches.

1st row—Slip 1, knit 1, then (pearl 2 and knit 2 alternately to the
end).

Knit 29 rows more the same, then 6 rows plain, and cast off.

Sew the sides together, then the 1st and last rows of the sole, and the
slanting sides, drawing the straight rows at the toe together.




BABY’S CROCHET BOOT.


    _Materials—8 skeins of white and 16 of colored Single Berlin
    Wool; Walker’s Penelope Crochet Needle, No. 1._ See page 13.

Commence at the Toe, and with the colored wool make 16 chain. The work
should be tight.

1st row—Miss 1, 7 plain, 3 plain in one stitch, 7 plain, then 1 chain
to form the selvedge, turn back. Now work in raised crochet, that is,
putting the needle into the lower edge of the stitch of the previous
row, and working a plain stitch, which will leave the upper edge in the
front.

2nd row—Miss the 1 chain, work 8 plain always raised, then 3 stitches
in one, 8 plain as before, 1 chain, turn back.

3rd row—Miss the 1 chain, then the rest plain; 1 chain at the end.

Repeat the last 2 rows, 9 times more, working a stitch more before and
after the centre stitches each repeat. Then, to form the side of the
boot,

22nd row—Miss the 1 chain, then 18 plain, still raised, 1 chain, turn
back.

Work 37 rows more as the last, and when finished, crochet the last row
to the other half of the front.

THE LEG—With the Colored wool commence at the centre stitch of the
front of the boot, and round the ribs formed by the side, worked thus—

1st round—4 chain, miss a rib, 1 plain in the side of the next rib.
Repeat all round.

2nd round—Work in the 4 chain, (1 plain, then 3 chain, 1 treble, 3
chain, 1 plain, all in the same 4 chain). Repeat all round, and fasten
off.

3rd round—With white wool commence at the top of the 10th rib of the 38
rows, and keeping the little Scallops formed by the last 2 rounds down
in the front, work 1 chain, miss a rib, 1 treble in the top of the rib
not used in the 1st round. Repeat all round.

4th round—All plain crochet.

5th round—Work in double crochet, that is, putting the needle into both
edges of the previous round, and working a plain stitch.

Work 14 rounds more as the last.

20th round—4 chain, miss 1 and 1 plain. Repeat.

21st round—5 chain, miss 4, 1 plain in the 4 chain. Repeat. Join on the
colored wool.

22nd and 23rd rounds—Work as the 21st round. Join on the white wool.

24th and 25th rounds—Work as the 21st round.

26th round—1 chain, miss 4, 1 plain in the 5 chain. Repeat, and fasten
off.


THE SOLE.

With the Colored wool make a chain of 9 stitches.

1st row—Miss 1, 2 plain in one stitch, 7 plain, turn back.

Now work the rest of the sole in double crochet, which being worked
backwards and forwards, will have a different effect from the leg.

2nd row—2 plain in the first stitch, the rest plain. Work 8 rows more
the same as the last. There will now be 18 stitches.

11th and 12th rows—Plain.

13th row—Miss 1, the rest plain. Work 5 rows more as the last. Then 4
rows plain.

23rd row—2 plain in one, the rest plain. Work 7 rows more as the last.

31st and 32nd rows—Plain.

33rd row—Miss 1, the rest plain. Work 5 rows more the same.

39th row—Miss 1, the rest plain to the last 2 stitches, then miss 1, 1
plain.

Work 3 rows more the same, and fasten off. Sew the sole to the front,
and finish with a bow and ribbon run into the open row at the leg.




LADY’S STOCKING.

IN RIBBED KNITTING.


    _Materials—5 ounces of Andalusian, Eider, or Welsh Yarn, 5
    Knitting Needles No. 18 Bell gauge. The following directions
    will make a full size stocking, viz., 15 inches round the top
    of the leg, 26 inches from the top to the heel, and 10½ inches
    long in the foot. By using Nos. 19 or 17 Needles a size smaller
    or larger can be made._ See Page 13.

Commence at the top of the leg, and to make the foundation strong,
the wool should be used double in casting on the stitches. Cast on 42
stitches on each of two needles, and 36 on the other two; keeping the
fifth for making it round.

1st round—Pearl 3 stitches and knit 3 stitches plain alternately all
round, in all 156 stitches. Continue the same until it is 13 inches in
length.

Always pearl or knit the same stitches throughout the leg.

TO SHAPE THE LEG—1st round—Pearl the 3 first stitches; then to
decrease, slip 1, knit 1, and turn the slipped stitch over; knit
1 plain; pearl 3 and knit 3, to within 2 stitches of the end, and
decrease again by knitting them together.

Knit 8 rounds without decreasing.

Repeat the same, decreasing 2 stitches every 9th round, until it is
reduced to 120 stitches.

In these rounds the 3 first stitches are always to be pearled; but
the few stitches immediately following will vary, on account of the
decreased stitches altering the number to be knitted or pearled. After
the decreasing is worked three times, the stitches will require to be
pearled together until the rib is decreased.

When the work is reduced to 120 stitches, sufficient rounds are to be
worked without shaping to make it 23 inches in length from the top.

TO FORM THE HEEL—1st row—Knit 1, pearl 1, knit 28; turn back, so as to
work on the 30 stitches, leaving the rest of the stitches unworked.

2nd row—Slip 1, pearl 29; then pearl 27 off the next needle; in all 57
stitches; turn back, leaving 63 stitches on the other needles for the
Instep.

3rd row—Slip the 1st stitch, knit, 27, pearl 1, knit 28; turn back.

4th row—Slip 1, pearl 56 stitches; turn back. Repeat the 2 last rows 25
times more.

TO ROUND THE HEEL—47th row—Slip 1, knit 21, knit 2 together, knit 8,
knit 2 together, knit 1, turn back, leaving 22 stitches on the other
needle.

48th row—Slip 1, pearl 12, turn back, leaving 20 stitches—slip 1, knit
2 together, knit 9, knit 2 together, knit 1, turn back; † slip 1, pearl
14—that is, 2 stitches on those left unworked, turn back—slip 1, knit 2
together, knit 11, knit 2 together, knit 1, turn back. Repeat from † 9
times more, always knitting or pearling 2 stitches more each time, so
as every row to use two of the stitches left; when finished, there will
be 33 stitches.

THE INSTEP—Take another needle and raise 26 stitches from the selvedge
formed by the rows of the left side of the Heel; then with a second
needle work across the Instep (pearling 3 and knitting 3 as before, 10
times); then pearl 3; and with a third needle raise 26 stitches from
the right selvedge of the Heel; and with a fourth needle knit the 33
stitches of the Heel. It will now be 148 stitches round.

1st round—Work across the instep. (Pearl 3 and knit 3, alternately as
before, 10 times) then pearl 3; knit 1, knit 2 together, knit 79 plain;
then knit 2 together, knit 1 plain.

2nd round—(Pearl 3 and knit 3, 10 times), pearl 3, knit the rest of the
round all plain.

Repeat these two rounds 16 times more, knitting two stitches less at
the stitches marked in italics each time. Then knit four inches the
same as the 2nd round.

THE TOE—1st round—Knit 2 together, knit 49 plain, knit 2 together, knit
4 plain. Repeat once more to finish the round. 2nd round—All plain.

Repeat the last 2 rounds, knitting 2 plain less each time instead of
49, until it is reduced to a few stitches. Then double the work, and
knitting a stitch off each needle together, cast them off.




ZOUAVE VESTE.

IN TRICOT ECOSSAIS, WITH TATTING EDGE.—SEE FRONTISPIECE.


    _Materials—6 ounces of Crimson, Mauve, Grey, or Violet 4-ply
    fleecy, and Walker’s Tricot Needle No. 4 Bell gauge. For the
    Border 2 skeins of White Berlin Wool, a large Shuttle, and
    round mesh No. 1 Bell gauge._


THE BACK.

Commence with 7 chain and work as directed for the Back of the
Crossover, page 9, ending with the 4 plain rows.


TO SHAPE THE RIGHT SIDE.

1st row—Continue working from the last row of the back. Raise 28 loops,
leaving the rest unworked for the other side. Work Back on these 28
loops.

2nd row—Raise all the loops of the last row to within 3 loops of the
end, then to decrease take 2 loops together as one stitch, raise the
last loop. Work back.

3rd row—Same as 2nd row.

4th row—Raise all the loops of the last row. Work back to within 4
loops, of the end, keep the 5th loop on the needle, and instead of
finishing the row, put the needle into the next stitch to the _left_,
and raise a loop so as to commence the next row.

5th row—Continue raising all the stitches of the last row. Work back
all the loops on the needle.

6th row—Raise 4 loops, but in raising the 5th loop, put the needle into
the next stitch of the lower row, which is under the one ordinarily
used. This will prevent any space showing where the last row was
turned. Raise the rest of the row as usual. Work back.

7th row—Raise all the loops without shaping. Work back.

Repeat the 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th rows, 5 times more.

28th row—Raise a loop, increase a loop, then raise all the loops to
within 4 loops of the end, decrease by taking 2 loops together, and
raise the last two loops. Work back.

29th row—Raise all the loops to within 4 of the end, then decrease, and
raise the last two loops. Work back.

Repeat the last two rows 10 times more. Then work 5 rows, leaving 2
loops unworked at the right end of the needle each time; which finishes
the right side. The last row is to be attached to the right side of the
first 10 rows of the back after the Border is worked.


THE LEFT SIDE.

1st row—Commence at the stitches of the Back, and, leaving 9 stitches
for the neck, raise the rest of the row—in all 28 loops. Work back.

2nd and 3rd rows—Work as usual, decreasing at the beginning of each row.

4th row—Raise all the loops to within 4 stitches of the end of the last
row, and, leaving them unfinished. Work back.

5th row—Raise all the loops of the last row, then raise the 4 loops of
the lower row. Work back.

6th and 7th rows—Work the rows without shaping.

Repeat as the 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th rows, 5 times more.

28th row—Raise a loop, then decrease. Raise all the loops to within 2
of the end. Increase a loop, and raise the 2 loops. Work back.

29th row—Raise a loop, decrease, then raise all the loops to the end.

Repeat the last two rows 10 times more; then work 5 rows, leaving 2
stitches at the left side of each row, and fasten off. After the Border
is worked, sew it to the left side of the back.


THE SASH.

Work as the Lappets of the Hood, page 4, commencing with the same color
as the Veste, and using the white wool for the Edge.

Make the Scallop Trimming with the white wool, and for the Joining use
the same color as the Veste.


THE BORDER.

For the Outside, commence with the white wool at the last stitch of
the left side of the Veste, so as to work on the selvedge formed by
the end of the rows, putting the needle sufficiently deep in the work
to correspond with the edge row of the Sash: work 3 plain crochet
stitches; * then 1 treble in the next stitch, 1 chain, 1 treble, 1
chain, and 1 treble again; these 3 treble stitches are all to be worked
in the same stitch of the Veste, then work 7 plain; and repeat again
from *, continuing the same all round to the opposite end at the right
side of the Veste. As the 3 treble stitches should come at the centre
of the back, it will be necessary to increase in rounding the point.

Make sufficient of the Scallop Trimming to go along this row, and join
it the same as the Sash. For the inner Border, commence at the last
stitch of the right side of the Veste, and work as the outer border.
The last row of each of the sides is then to be sewn to the back under
the Border, and the Sash ends attached on the wrong side. The Veste
should be fastened with buttons down the front.




KNITTED MUFFATEE.

FOR A GENTLEMAN.


    _Materials—1 ounce of White and 6 skeins of colored Single
    Berlin Wool; pair of Walker’s knitting pins No. 12 Bell gauge._
    See page 13.

Commence with the Colored wool, and cast on 48 stitches.

1st row—Slip 1, knit 1, then (pearl 2 stitches and knit 2 alternately
to the end).

Knit 5 rows more the same.

Join on the white, and knit 6 rows. Then 3 rows of the colored.

For the Centre, knit 36 rows of white—then 3 rows of coloured—6 rows of
white, and 6 rows of coloured.

For the Lining, knit 60 rows of white. Cast off. Sew the sides
together, then double the cuff and sew the first and last rows together.




ROUND SHETLAND VEIL.

KNITTING.


    _Materials—One ounce of Shetland Wool and a pair of Knitting
    Pins No. 14 Bell gauge._

THE CENTRE.—Cast on 49 stitches loosely with two pins.

1st row—Make 1, knit 2 together, * make 1, knit 3 plain, make 1, knit 3
all together. Repeat from * to the last 5 stitches, then make 1, knit
3, make 1, knit 2 plain.

2nd row—Make 1, knit 2 together, * make 1, 2 together, knit 1, 2
together, make 1, knit 1; repeat from *, and at the end knit 2 plain
instead of 1.

3rd row—Make 1, knit 2 plain; * make 1, 2 together, make 1, 3 together,
make 1, knit 1. Repeat from * to within 5 stitches of the end, then
make 1, knit only 2 together, make 1 and knit 3 plain.

4th row—Make 1, 2 together; * make 1, knit 1, make 1, 2 together, knit
1, 2 together. Repeat from * to the last 3 stitches, then make 1, knit
1, make 1, knit 2 plain.

The work will now be increased 6 stitches. Commence again at the 1st
row and repeat these four rows until it is the required size; then knit
three rows plain and cast off.

Make sufficient of the Diamond Border to edge it.


DIAMOND EDGING.

Commence by casting on 12 stitches.

1st row—Make 1, knit 2 together, knit 1, make 1, knit 2 together, knit
the rest plain. The 3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th, 11th, 13th, and 15th rows are
all worked as the 1st row, and are therefore not given.

2nd row—Make 1, knit 3, make 1, 2 together, knit 4, make 1, 2 together,
knit 1.

4th row—Make 1, knit 5, make 1, 2 together, knit 3, make 1, 2 together,
knit 1.

6th row—Make 1, knit 1, 2 together, make 1, knit 1, make 1, knit 1, 2
together, make 1, 2 together, knit 2, make 1, 2 together, knit 1.

8th row—Make 1, knit 1, 2 together, make 1, knit 3 (make 1, 2 together
and knit 1, three times).

10th row—Make 1, knit 3 together, knit 1, make 1, 3 together, make 1
knit 1, 2 together, make 1, knit 3, make 1, 2 together, knit 1.

12th row—Make 1, knit 3 together, knit 1, (2 together twice), make 1,
knit 4, make 1, 2 together, knit 1.

[Illustration]

14th row—Make 1, knit 3 together, then 2 together, make 1, knit 5, make
1, 2 together, knit 1.

16th row—Make 1, 3 together, make 1, knit 6, make 1, 2 together, knit
1. Commence again at the 1st row. When sufficient is made it is to be
sewn to the Veil.




THE “EMPIRE” PETTICOAT.

TRICOT ECOSSAIS.—SEE FRONTISPIECE.


    _Materials—1lb. of Scarlet or Mauve 4-ply Fleecy; also 2 ounces
    of Black and 1 ounce of White Wool. Walker’s Tricot Needle No.
    5 Bell gauge._


FIRST STRIPE.

Commence with the Scarlet Wool, and make a chain of 33 stitches.

Work 2 rows of Tricot Ecossais as described at page 28, then join on
the Black Wool to finish the last stitch.

3rd row—Black—Raise the 1st loop, then increase a loop, raise 13 loops;
then decrease by taking 3 loops on the needle and working as one
stitch. Raise 13 loops, increase again, and raise the two last loops.
Work back. All the rows are worked in this manner, that is, increasing
at the beginning and end, and decreasing in the centre.

4th row—Work as the last row.

Then with the White Wool work a row as the last.

Black 2 rows.

Scarlet 10 rows.

18th row—Raise the 1st loop and increase as before. Raise 11 loops,
then decrease by taking 2 loops together; decrease again, taking 3
loops together as usual; then decrease a third time, taking 2 together.
Raise 11 loops. Increase and raise 2 loops. There will now be only 31
loops. Work back.

Work 10 rows more as the 3rd row, but raising 12 loops instead of 13 on
each side of the centre decreased stitches.

29th row—Work as the 18th row, but raising 10 loops instead of 11 loops
on each side the decreased stitches.

Continue working 10 rows as the 3rd row, and then a row decreasing 3
times in the same manner as the 18th row, until the work is reduced to
23 stitches, when it will be about 30 inches in length.

As the number of stitches decreases each time the 18th row is worked, a
less number of stitches must be raised on each side of the centre.

To finish the Stripe work 3 rows, decreasing in the centre and leaving
2 stitches unworked at each side; then work back to the right side, and
end with a row of single crochet.

For an ordinary sized Petticoat 10 stripes will be required. The last
stripes should not be joined to the top.

THE EDGE—With the Black Wool commence at the top of the left side of a
Stripe, and work down the selvedge a row of plain Crochet, putting the
needle into the open spaces formed by the increased stitches. This row
should be worked loosely. Continue this row across the foundation, and
up the right side of the Stripe. Work the other Stripes the same.

THE JOINING ROW—With the White Wool commence at the black stitch even
with the white row of the stripe; work a single stitch on the stripe.
Take a second stripe, put the needle into the corresponding stitch
of it, work another single stitch. Continue working a single stitch
alternately on each stripe, until they are joined; the needle should be
put in both edges of the black row. The first four rows of the stripes
are to be sewn together with Scarlet and Black Wool.

THE BORDER—With the White Wool commence at the black row of the
foundation, and work a row of 1 chain, miss 1 and 1 plain; putting the
needle in the same scarlet stitches as the black row, so as to cover
the alternate stitches of it. Repeat all round.

With the Scarlet Wool work 3 chain, miss 1 and 1 plain in each chain
stitch of the white row.




TRICOT ECOSSAIS.

A CHAIN ROW is always made for the foundation of the work, the same as
in Crochet, and after the number of chain stitches are made, as given
in each direction, the last loop is to be kept on the needle.

[Illustration: SECTION.]

1st row—still keeping the loop on the needle—miss the 1st chain stitch,
put the needle into the next chain stitch, take up the wool on the
needle and draw it through in a loop; * keep the two loops on the
needle, put the needle into the next chain stitch and repeat from * to
the end of the chain. This is termed “raising” loops or stitches, and
there should be as many loops on the needle as the foundation chain.

To “Work back”—Take up the wool on the needle and bring it through the
last loop on it, * then take up the wool again and bring it through the
two next loops, as shown at the left side of the Section. Repeat from *
to the end.

In raising the loops for the 2nd row the needle is to be put into the
upright loops of the previous row, as shown in the two first loops at
the right side of the section.

To “Increase”—The third loop on the needle is an increased stitch,
which is made by putting the needle between two upright loops and
bringing the wool through as usual.

In counting the loops always reckon the number on the needle, including
the one at the edge.

       *       *       *       *       *

    To insure correctness in the size of the Needles used in Mdlle.
    Riego’s publications, a drawing of the Gauge by which they
    are numbered, is now given. All Knitting Needles are measured
    in the circle close to the numbers. Tricot Needles the same,
    gauging by the stem.

[Illustration: UNCOTOPIC H. WALKER’S PATENT.]




H. WALKER,

    _Manufacturer to the Queen of Pins, Fish Hooks, Hooks & Eyes,
    Hair Pins, Thimbles, &c._

WAREHOUSE—GRESHAM STREET, LONDON, E.C.   MANUFACTORY—ALCESTER.


[Illustration: BELL GAUGE]

H. WALKER’S NEEDLES have long enjoyed great popularity with those who
value really good Needles. They have been greatly altered by Patented
Improvements of a most important character.

H. WALKER’S PATENT PENELOPE CROCHETS have had so many imitations, it is
necessary to repeat the request that all who wish for the true Needle
will see that the word “Penelope” is on the handle.

The new Patent Uncotopic Handles to the Penelope Needles have the word
“Uncotopic” on each, and persons who would avoid disappointment will
please to observe these trade marks. The Uncotopic Handle keeps the
Needle at all times in the true position for work, and is invaluable
alike to a beginner, or to an accomplished worker.

[Illustration: H. Walker Needles

Fig. 1.

Fig. 2.]

The following is from “_The Engineer_,” of May 4, 1859:—“Difficult as
it may appear to entirely change the structure of so small an article,
the figures above show what may be done even with the eye of a Needle.

“Fig. 1. A, is a ridge or slightly raised part before the eye; B, the
eye; C, a groove beyond the eye into which the thread falls.

“Fig. 2 is a side view of the part A, B, C, showing the thread recessed
as in sewing, when the usual pressure of the thimble drives the Needle
with its thread at once through the cloth, affording relief of no
ordinary character to the tailor or seampstress, and saving much of
their time. We have submitted these Needles to a good judge of such
articles, who has declared them superior to all others, not only as
above stated, but particularly also with relation to facility of
threading.”




[Illustration:

          CHRISTMAS
         PRESENTS
            AND
     NEW YEAR’S GIFTS
     FOR ALL WHO COURT
    THE GAY AND FESTIVE
         SCENES.]


ROWLANDS’ MACASSAR OIL,

IS A DELIGHTFULLY FRAGRANT AND TRANSPARENT PREPARATION FOR THE HAIR.

And, as an invigorator and beautifier, beyond all precedent. It bestows
a permanent gloss, with a silky softness, and a strong tendency to
curl, and is the only known specific capable of effectually sustaining
the Hair in decorative charm during the exercise of dancing, or the
relaxing effects of crowded rooms. Prices 3s. 6d.; 7s. 10s. 6d.; equal
to four small, and double that size, 21s. per bottle.


ROWLANDS’ KALYDOR,

FOR THE SKIN AND COMPLEXION.

A balmy, odoriferous, creamy Liquid, as equally celebrated for safety
in application as

UNEQUALLED FOR ITS RARE AND INESTIMABLE QUALITIES.

The radiant bloom it imparts to the cheek, the softness and delicacy
which it induces of the hands and arms, its capability of soothing
irritation, and removing cutaneous defects, discolourations, and all
unsightly appearances render it

INDISPENSABLE TO EVERY TOILET.

Price 4s. 6d. and 8s. 8d. per bottle.


ROWLANDS’ ODONTO,

OR PEARL DENTIFRICE.

A White Powder, compounded of the choicest and most _recherché_
ingredients of the Oriental Herbal, and of inestimable value in

PRESERVING AND IMPARTING

A PEARL-LIKE WHITENESS TO THE TEETH;

STRENGTHENING THE GUMS; AND IN GIVING A PLEASING FRAGRANCE TO THE
BREATH.

Price 2s. 9d. per box.


Sold at 20, Hatton Garden, London, and by Chemists and Perfumers.

☞ _Ask for_ “ROWLANDS’” _articles_.




WALTER EVANS & CO.,

BOAR’S-HEAD COTTON MANUFACTORY,

DERBY,

MANUFACTURE THE FOLLOWING:—


SUPERIOR SIX CORD CROCHET COTTON, on Spools and in Skeins, for Sewing,
    Knitting, and Crochet Work.
SUPERIOR SIX CORD SEWINGS, on Spools, soft finish, for Sewing Machines, &c.
TATTING COTTON, on Spools.
PATENT GLACE THREAD, in White, Black, and Colors, on Spools and Cards.
TWO AND THREE CORD SEWINGS, on Spools, soft finish.
SEWINGS in Balls.
EMBROIDERING, KNITTING, MENDING, COTTON CORDS, AND SMALL CORDS.

[Illustration: 1862.

London Exhibition Prize Medal, Awarded “for very Strong & most superior
Thread.”]

[Illustration: 1867.

Paris Universal Exhibition Gold Medal.]




NOTICE.


_Mlle. Riego de la Branchardiere begs most gratefully to thank her
correspondents for the kind letters she has received during sorrow and
illness, and trusts that any omissions on her part will be excused now
the cause is known._

_She has also to inform them that for the future all her registered and
copyright designs will be signed with her surname in full, she having
hitherto used only the first as more convenient for business; but as
she has reason to believe that there has been a recent infringement and
use of her name, it has become advisable for her to vary her signature,
otherwise she cannot so readily detect fraud._

_Mlle. Riego de la Branchardiere must caution ladies against purchasing
any of her designs without the whole signature, as she is informed by
law it is against the purchaser only she must proceed in case it should
be necessary to assert her rights._

Mlle. Riego’s ONLY Establishment is at 2, Old Quebec Street, London.

                                      s.   d.

The Complete Tatting Book             1    0
The Instruction Tatting Book          1    0
The Exhibition Tatting Book           1    0
The Royal Tatting Book                1    0
The Lace Tatting Book                 1    0
The Etoile Tatting Book               1    0
The Pearl Tatting Book                1    0
The 6th Series Crochet Book           1    0
The Simple Tatting Book               0    6
The 18th Series Crochet Book          1    0
The 10th and 17th Series              1    6
The Useful Knitting Book              1    0
Winter Book for 1862                  1    0
“Melange de Laine”                    1    0
“Tricot Ecossais”                     1    0
The Andalusian Knitting and Netting   1    0
Coloured Antimacassars                1    0
Tatting Edgings                       0    6
La Mode Winter                        0    6
The Book of Siberian Wool             0    6
The Child’s Winter Knitting           0    6

Entered at Stationers’ Hall.]

        [The Author reserves the right of Translation.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ABERGELDIE WINTER BOOK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.