All-Time Favorite
                           CRANBERRY RECIPES


                              CRANBERRIES
                the Year ’Round Berries with the Bounce

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]




                      The Beginning of the Berries


Cranberries are truly North American berries. Before Columbus came to
the new world, the tangy wild cranberries had an important place in
everyday life here. Indian squaws used cranberries to brighten up food.

The Wampanoag Indians of Cape Cod area treated wounds from poisoned
arrows with a cranberry dressing. Squaws made their rugs and blankets
colorful with the red cranberry juice.

Pilgrim women learned of this wild berry from the friendly Indians. They
soon began to create their own ways of fixing cranberries for their
tables. They made cranberry sauces, bubbling tarts and nogs.

    [Illustration: IT’S BEAUTIFUL, DEAR]




                       The Naming of the Berries


Cranberries were called different names by different Indians:
“Sassamanesh” by eastern Indians and “Atoqua” by the Algonquians in
Wisconsin. In New Jersey, where cranberries were the symbol of peace,
“Pakimintzen” meant cranberry eater.

The word “cranberry” was a contraction of crane berry, an early name
given to the berries because their pale pink blossoms resembled the head
of a crane. Cranes were seen in the lowlands, enjoying the berries.

    [Illustration: PAKIMINTZEN—HEAP GOOD]




                       The Taming of the Berries


Cultivation of cranberries began in Massachusetts nearly 200 years after
the landing of the Pilgrims. In 1816 Henry Hall of Dennis, Cape Cod,
noticed that cranberries seemed to grow larger and juicier where sand
from the dunes blew over the vines. Cultivation today came from this
simple observation made more than 150 years ago.

Cranberries grow on peat soil that has been covered with a three inch
layer of sand. Cuttings or branches from existing cranberry vines are
planted deep enough to take root in the peat soil beneath the sand. The
vines, planted about six inches apart, gradually spread over the ground
forming a thick green carpet. The vines are weeded in the spring, pruned
in the fall, fertilized and resanded every three or four years. Vines
are protected from frost by flooding and irrigated in time of drought.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

Birds are needed to control the insects. Bees pollinate the blossoms.

Cranberries were first picked by hand then by wooden fingered scoops
which combed the berries from the vines. Since World War II, the scoops
have been replaced by mechanical pickers which complete the harvest
faster and cut down risk of frost damage.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]




                       The Testing of the Berries


Every cranberry delivered to a receiving station must measure up to the
highest standards of quality before it can travel under the Ocean Spray
label. After passing through a machine which blows out the chaff, a
cranberry must demonstrate that it’s got bounce. Bounce? That’s right.
You wonder why? It’s this simple—a good firm berry will bounce. A soft
berry won’t. Mechanical separators give each berry seven chances to
bounce over four-inch wooden barriers. Berries that don’t have the
necessary bounce are discarded. Only the lively ones go on to the
screening room where canvas belts carry them between rows of sharp-eyed
women who pick out any not up to Ocean Spray’s standards of appearance.

After proving themselves worthy of the Ocean Spray label, cranberries
for the fresh market go to packaging machines. Those for ready-to-serve
products go either to wash tanks for immediate processing or to freezers
which hold them until they’re needed.

Ocean Spray Cranberries, Inc. is a national cooperative with
grower-members in five cranberry-growing states: Massachusetts, New
Jersey, Wisconsin, Washington and Oregon. They produce an annual harvest
of over 200 million pounds of cranberries.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]




                                Contents


  _Fresh_                                                         _Page_
      CRANBERRY SALADS AND SIDE DISHES                               5-6
      CRANBERRY MAIN DISHES                                            7
      CRANBERRY BREADS, CAKES AND COOKIES                            8-9
      CRANBERRY DESSERTS                                           10-11
  _Recipes with Cranberry Drinks and Sauces_
      APPETIZERS                                                      12
      CRANBERRY SALADS                                             13-15
      CRANBERRY MAIN DISHES                                        16-19
      CRANBERRY BREADS, CAKES AND COOKIES                          20-24
      CRANBERRY DESSERTS                                           25-27
      CRANBERRY BEVERAGES                                          28-32

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

              _Published by Ocean Spray Cranberries, Inc.
                     Plymouth, Massachusetts 02360_




                                _Fresh_


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]




                    CRANBERRY SALADS AND SIDE DISHES


Cranberry Waldorf

  2 cups (½ pound) Ocean Spray fresh or frozen cranberries
  3 cups miniature marshmallows
  ¾ cup sugar
                                 * * * * *
  2 cups diced unpared tart apples
  ½ cup seedless green grapes
  ½ cup broken walnuts
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 cup whipping cream, whipped

Grind cranberries and combine with marshmallows and sugar. Cover and
chill overnight. Add apples, grapes, walnuts and salt. Fold in whipped
cream; chill. Serve in large bowl or individual lettuce cups. Garnish
with clusters of green grapes and fresh cranberries, if desired. Makes 8
to 10 servings.


Cranberry Orange Crush

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 pound (4 cups) Ocean Spray fresh cranberries
  1 small orange, cut in eighths
  1 to 1½ cups sugar

_To prepare in a food grinder_: Put fresh cranberries and orange
sections through a food grinder. Add sugar, mix well and chill several
hours before serving.

_To prepare in a blender_: Place ½ cup cranberries and ⅛ orange into a
blender container. Process on high until finely chopped. Transfer to a
bowl. Repeat with remaining cranberries and orange sections. Stir in
sugar to taste.

_To prepare in a food processor_: Add half the cranberries and half the
orange pieces to food processor. Turn on and off rapidly, until mixture
is evenly chopped. Transfer to a bowl. Repeat with remaining cranberries
and orange pieces. Add sugar to taste.

Makes 3½ cups. Store in airtight container in refrigerator or freezer.


Whole Berry Cranberry Sauce

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1-2 cups water
  1 pound (4 cups) Ocean Spray fresh or frozen cranberries
  1-2 cups sugar

Combine sugar and water in saucepan; stir to dissolve sugar. Bring to
boil; add cranberries; cook till skins pop, about 5 minutes longer.

Remove from heat. Serve sauce warm or chilled. Makes about 4 cups of
sauce.

   SWEETNESS           TART               SWEET
      Gel         Firm      Soft      Firm      Soft

  Sugar         1 Cup     1 Cup     2 Cups    2 Cups
  Water         1 Cup     2 Cups    1 Cup     2 Cups
  Cranberries   4 Cups    4 Cups    4 Cups    4 Cups


Cranberry Applesauce

  2 cups canned applesauce
  2 cups Ocean Spray fresh or frozen cranberries
  ½ cup sugar
  ½ teaspoon ground ginger

Mix together all ingredients in a 2-quart saucepan. Simmer, stirring
constantly over low heat until cranberries are tender. Makes 4-6
servings.


Baked Cranberry Acorn Squash

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  4 small acorn squash
  1 cup chopped unpared apple
  1 cup Ocean Spray fresh or frozen cranberries, chopped
  ½ teaspoon grated orange peel
  ½ cup brown sugar
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine, melted

Cut squash in half lengthwise; remove seeds. Place cut side down in 13 x
9 x 2″ baking dish. Bake in 350° oven for 35 minutes. Turn cut side up.
Combine remaining ingredients; fill squash with fruit mixture. Continue
baking for 25 minutes or till squash is tender. Makes 8 servings.




                         CRANBERRY MAIN DISHES


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


Chicken Ruby

  1 broiler, cut in quarters
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¼ cup butter (margarine)
  ½ medium onion (chopped)
  ¼ teaspoon cinnamon
  ¼ teaspoon ginger
  1 teaspoon grated orange rind
  ¾ cup orange juice
  1½ cups Ocean Spray Fresh Cranberries
  ½ cup chopped walnuts
  ¾ cup sugar

Sprinkle chicken with salt. Brown in butter in skillet. Add onion,
spices, orange rind and orange juice. Simmer covered for 20 minutes. Add
cranberries and walnuts. Sprinkle with sugar. Simmer uncovered for 10
minutes longer.


Stuffed Burger Bundles

  1 cup packaged herb-seasoned stuffing mix
  ½ cup fresh cranberries, chopped
  1 pound ground beef
  ⅓ cup evaporated milk
  1 10½-ounce can condensed cream of mushroom soup
  1 tablespoon catsup
  2 teaspoons Worcestershire sauce

Prepare stuffing according to package directions; add cranberries.
Combine ground beef and milk; divide in 5 portions. On waxed paper, pat
each portion to 6-inch circle. Place about ¼ cup stuffing in center of
each; draw meat over stuffing to make meat “balls” with stuffing in
center; seal. Place in 1½-quart casserole. Combine remaining
ingredients; pour over meat. Bake, uncovered, in 350° oven for 45 to 50
minutes. Makes 5 servings.


Cranberry Pork Chops

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  4 pork chops, 1 inch thick
  2 tablespoons cooking oil
  1 teaspoon salt
  ½ cup dry red wine
  ½ cup honey
  1 cup fresh cranberries

In skillet, brown pork chops in hot oil; season with salt and dash
pepper. Drain off excess fat. Combine wine and honey; pour over chops.
Cover and simmer 1 hour, adding cranberries about 10 minutes before end
of cooking time. Makes 4 servings.




                  CRANBERRY BREADS, CAKES AND COOKIES


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


Cranberry Coffee Cake

  2 cups sifted all-purpose flour
  3 teaspoons double-acting baking powder
  ¾ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup sugar
  5 tablespoons butter
  1 egg, beaten
  ½ cup milk
  2½ cups Ocean Spray fresh cranberries, coarsely chopped


                                Topping:

  ¼ cup all-purpose flour
  ½ cup sugar
  3 tablespoons butter

Sift flour, baking powder, salt and sugar together. Cut in butter with
pastry blender until crumbly. Mix beaten egg and milk. Add to flour
mixture. Stir slowly to mix, then beat until blended well. Spread batter
evenly into 8 x 8 x 2″ buttered baking dish. Sprinkle halved cranberries
evenly over top. For topping, mix flour and sugar together. Cut in
butter. Sprinkle over cranberries. Bake in 375°F. oven for 30 to 35
minutes. Makes 9 coffee cake squares.


Cranberry Squares

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  2 cups all-purpose flour
  1 cup sugar
  1½ teaspoons baking powder
  1 teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon baking soda
  ¾ cup orange juice
  2 tablespoons shortening
  1 well beaten egg
  1½ cups Ocean Spray fresh or fresh frozen cranberries, coarsely
              chopped
  ½ cup chopped nuts
  [a]Streusel Topping

Preheat oven to 350°. In a bowl, mix together flour, sugar, baking
powder, salt and baking soda. Stir in orange juice, shortening and egg.
Mix until well blended. Carefully fold in cranberries and nuts. Turn
into greased 9 x 13 x 2 inch pan. Sprinkle with Streusel Topping. Bake
30 to 35 minutes. Serve warm.


  [a]To prepare Streusel Topping: Mix together until crumbly ¼ cup flour,
    2 tablespoons butter or margarine, ⅓ cup sugar and ¾ teaspoon
    cinnamon.


Note: _To prepare Cranberry Squares using Ocean Spray Cranberry Sauce,
substitute one can (8 ounces) whole berry cranberry sauce for fresh
cranberries, reduce sugar to ½ cup and orange juice to ½ cup._


Cranberry Fruit Nut Bread

  2 cups all-purpose flour
  1 cup sugar
  1½ teaspoons baking powder
  1 teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon baking soda
  2 tablespoons shortening
  1 tablespoon grated orange peel
  ¾ cup orange juice
  1 well-beaten egg
  1 cup Ocean Spray fresh cranberries, coarsely chopped
  ½ cup chopped nuts

Preheat oven to 350°. Mix together flour, sugar, baking powder, salt and
baking soda. Stir in orange juice, orange peel, shortening and egg. Mix
until well blended. Stir in cranberries and nuts. Turn into a 9 x 5″
loaf pan, greased on bottom only. Bake 55 minutes, or until toothpick
inserted in center comes out clean. Cool thoroughly before serving.


Cranberry Muffins

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  ¾ cup Ocean Spray fresh cranberries, halved
  ½ cup powdered sugar
  2 cups flour
  3 teaspoons baking powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ cup sugar
  1 egg, well beaten
  1 cup milk
  4 tablespoons shortening, melted

Mix cranberry halves with powdered sugar and let stand while preparing
muffin mixture. Sift dry ingredients. Add egg, milk and melted
shortening all at once; mix until dry ingredients are dampened; do not
beat. Fold in sugared cranberries. Fill muffin tins ⅔ full. Bake in
moderate oven 350°F. for 20 minutes. Makes 1 dozen.


Cranberry Kitchen Cookies

  ½ cup butter or margarine
  1 cup granulated sugar
  ¾ cup brown sugar (packed)
  ¼ cup milk
  2 tablespoons orange juice
  1 egg
  3 cups sifted flour
  1 teaspoon baking powder
  ¼ teaspoon baking soda
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 cup chopped nuts
  2½ cups Ocean Spray fresh cranberries, coarsely chopped

Cream butter and sugars together. Beat in the milk, orange juice and
egg. Sift together flour, baking powder, baking soda and salt. Combine
with creamed mixture and blend well. Stir in chopped nuts and
cranberries. Drop by teaspoonfuls onto greased cooky sheet. Bake at
375°F. for 10-15 minutes. Makes about 12 doz. tea-size cookies.

Note: _1 teaspoon orange extract may be substituted for orange juice.
Milk must then be increased to ⅓ cup. To bake as bar cookies, spread
batter on a well-greased 11 x 15 x 1″ pan and bake at 350°F. for 45
minutes or until golden brown. For a sugary crust, sprinkle with
granulated sugar. Makes 4 dozen 1 x 2″ bars._




                           CRANBERRY DESSERTS


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


Fresh Cranberry Crunch

  1 cup granulated sugar
  1 tablespoon cornstarch
  ½ cup water
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  Pinch of salt
  2 cups Ocean Spray Fresh Cranberries
  ½ cup seedless raisins
  1 cup uncooked rolled oats
  1 cup light brown sugar, firmly packed
  ½ cup all-purpose flour
  ⅓ cup butter or margarine

In saucepan mix sugar, cornstarch, water, vanilla and salt. Stir in
cranberries and raisins. Bring to a boil over medium heat. Reduce heat,
simmer for 5 minutes and cool slightly. Mix oats, brown sugar and flour
together. Cut in butter or margarine until crumbly mixture forms.
Sprinkle one-half over bottom of greased 8 x 8 inch pan. Spread with
cooled cranberry filling and top with remaining half of oatmeal mixture.
Bake in 350° oven for 45 minutes. Serve warm or cold. Top each serving
with vanilla ice cream, if desired. 6-9 servings.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


Cranberry Refrigerator Dessert

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  2 cups (½ pound) Ocean Spray fresh or frozen cranberries, chopped
  1 large banana, diced
  1½ cups sugar, divided
  2 cups vanilla wafer crumbs
  1 cup butter or margarine, divided
  ½ cup chopped nuts
  2 eggs
  1 cup heavy cream, whipped

In a bowl, mix together chopped cranberries, diced banana and ½ cup
sugar; set aside. In another bowl, mix together crumbs, and ½ cup melted
butter. Press half the mixture into bottom of 9-inch square pan. In a
bowl cream remaining butter and sugar until light; add eggs and beat
till fluffy. Fold in nuts and spread mixture over crumb layer. Top with
cranberry mixture and whipped cream. Sprinkle with remaining crumbs.
Chill 6 hours or overnight. Makes 12 servings.


Cranberry Fruit Bowl

  1 jar (32 oz.) grapefruit sections
  1 cup sugar
  ½ cup orange marmalade
  2 cups Ocean Spray fresh or frozen whole cranberries
  3 medium bananas

Drain liquid from grapefruit sections into a saucepan. Add sugar and
marmalade; heat to boiling. Add cranberries and cook till skins of
cranberries pop. Cool. Add grapefruit sections. When ready to serve stir
in slices of bananas. Makes 8 servings.


Hot Cranberry Fruit Compote

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 can (16 ounces) pear halves in syrup
  1 can (16 ounces) apricot halves in syrup
  1 cup Ocean Spray fresh or frozen cranberries
  2 tablespoons brown sugar
  ¼ teaspoon nutmeg

Drain syrup from canned fruits into a saucepan. Add cranberries, brown
sugar and nutmeg. Cook over medium heat 5 minutes until cranberries are
soft. Cool. Stir in pear and apricot halves. Makes 6-8 servings.


Cranberries Jubilee

  1 cup sugar
  1½ cups water
  2 cups Ocean Spray fresh or frozen cranberries
  ¼ cup brandy
  Vanilla ice cream

Combine sugar and water in saucepan, stirring to dissolve sugar. Bring
to boiling; boil 5 minutes. Add cranberries and bring to boiling again;
cook 5 minutes. Turn into heat-proof bowl or blazer pan of chafing dish.
Heat brandy. Ignite brandy and pour over cranberry mixture. Blend into
sauce and serve immediately over ice cream. Makes 2½ cups sauce.


Cranberry Lemon Sauce

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  ¾ cup sugar
  2 teaspoons unflavored gelatin
  ⅓ cup water
  2 cups Ocean Spray fresh or frozen cranberries
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  1 teaspoon lemon peel

In a saucepan, mix together sugar and gelatin. Gradually add water; stir
to dissolve sugar. Bring to boil over medium heat, stirring
occasionally. Add cranberries, lemon peel and juice. Cook stirring until
skins pop. Chill until thickened. Serve as a topping for cheesecake,
crepes or ice cream. Makes 2 cups sauce.




               _Recipes with Cranberry Drinks and Sauces_




                               APPETIZERS


Cranberry Fruit Dip

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 package (3 ounces) cream cheese, softened
  ½ cup dairy sour cream
  ⅔ cup Ocean Spray Cranberry Orange Relish

In a bowl, mix together cream cheese and sour cream; beat till smooth.
Stir in cranberry orange relish. Chill. Serve as a dip with fresh fruit,
such as fresh strawberries, pineapple chunks, melon balls. Makes 1½
cups.


Ham and Chicken Fondue

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  ½ cup orange juice
  1 tablespoon cornstarch
  1 can (16 ounces) Ocean Spray Whole Berry Cranberry Sauce
  1 tablespoon brown sugar
  ¼ teaspoon ground cinnamon
  Fully-cooked ham or chicken cubes

In saucepan, blend orange juice and cornstarch. Add cranberry sauce,
brown sugar and cinnamon. Cook, stirring constantly, till mixture
thickens and bubbles. Keep sauce warm in fondue pot. Use ham and chicken
cubes as dippers. Makes 2 cups sauce.


Tangy Cranberry Dip

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 can (8 ounces) Ocean Spray Whole Berry Cranberry Sauce
  ⅔ cup chili sauce
  2 tablespoons burgundy wine

In a bowl, mix together cranberry sauce, chili sauce and wine. Chill.
Serve with ham cubes, chicken cubes or cooked shelled shrimp. Makes
about 1⅓ cups dip.




                            CRANBERRY SALADS


Cranberry Lemon Ring

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  2 envelopes unflavored gelatine
  ½ cup cold water
  2 cans (1 lb. each) Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce
  ⅓ to ½ cup lemon juice
  2 teaspoons grated lemon rind
  Chicken or Turkey salad

Place gelatine in cup. Add cold water and let stand 2 minutes. Place cup
in pan of boiling water until gelatine dissolves. Stir dissolved
gelatine into cranberry sauce that has been beaten ’til saucy with
rotary beater. Add lemon juice and rind. Spoon into a ring mold and
chill until firm. Fill with chicken or turkey salad to serve.


Cranberry Cherry Mist

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 package black cherry flavored gelatin
  ¾ cup very hot water
  1 (1-lb.) can Ocean Spray Whole Cranberry Sauce
  ¼ cup gingerale
  Sour cream
  Ground cinnamon

Dissolve gelatin in hot water. Stir in whole cranberry sauce and
gingerale. Rinse a 1½ pint mold with cold water. Pour in gelatin
mixture. Chill until firm. Unmold when ready to serve. Garnish with
commercial soured cream mixed with a dash of ground cinnamon. Makes 4 to
6 servings.

Note: _For elegant dessert increase amount of gingerale to ½ cup. Spoon
mixture into 4 sherbet glasses. Place in refrigerator until serving
time. Serve with some sour cream topping._


Cranberry Jewel Salad

  1 package raspberry flavored gelatin
  1 cup hot water
  ½ cup cold water
  1 orange
  1 pound can Ocean Spray Cranberry Sauce (whole, drained, or jellied,
              crushed)

Dissolve gelatin in hot water. Add cold water. Chill until mixture
begins to jell. If whole cranberry sauce is used, drain. If jellied
cranberry sauce is used, beat with beater until saucy. Quarter orange,
remove seeds, and put rind and pulp through food chopper. Fold cranberry
sauce and orange into raspberry gelatin. Pour into molds or pan. Chill
until firm. Serve in crisp lettuce cups. Makes 6 servings.


Oriental Cranberry Salad

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 pkg. orange flavored gelatin
  1 cup boiling water
  ½ cup cold water
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  14 oz. jar Ocean Spray Cranberry Orange Relish
  2 tablespoons crystallized ginger
  5 oz. can water chestnuts, drained and chopped
  ½ teaspoon celery seed

Dissolve gelatin in boiling water. Add cold water and lemon juice. Chill
until slightly thickened. Fold in cranberry orange relish, ginger, water
chestnuts and celery seed. Pour into molds. Chill until firm. Yield: 6
servings.


Frozen Cranberry Layer Salad

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 lb. can Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce
  2 tablespoons lemon juice

Beat cranberry sauce with rotary beater until saucy. Combine with lemon
juice. Spread in the bottom of a mold or small individual molds. Cover
cranberry layer with the following:

  1 cup heavy cream, whipped
  ¼ cup mayonnaise
  ¼ cup powdered sugar
  ½ cup chopped pecans or black walnuts

Whip the cream and fold in the mayonnaise, the sugar and nuts. Spoon
over cranberry layer in salad mold or molds. Place in the refrigerator
freezing compartment for at least 3 hours to become firmly frozen.
Unmold. Serve on lettuce with a small dab of mayonnaise.

Suggestion: _Freeze in star-shaped molds for a Christmas menu ... the
whipped cream layer can be tinted green for a striking effect._


Frozen Cranberry Cheese Salad

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  2 (3-oz.) packages cream cheese
  1 cup mayonnaise
  1 cup whipping cream
  ½ cup ripe olives, sliced thin
  1 cup crushed pineapple, drained
  1 cup Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce, cubed

Cream the cheese and mix well with mayonnaise. Whip cream and add. Fold
in sliced olives, crushed pineapple and cranberry sauce cubes. Pack in
refrigerator tray and freeze for 3 to 4 hours. Slice and serve on
lettuce.


Cranberry Salad Sweet and Sour

  1 large package raspberry flavored gelatin (6 oz.)
  1 cup boiling water
  1 lb. can Ocean Spray Whole Cranberry Sauce
  ½ cup orange juice
  1 tablespoon grated orange rind
  1 unpeeled apple (grated)
  1 small grapefruit

Dissolve gelatin in the boiling water. Add cranberry sauce; stir until
completely mixed. Add the orange juice and grated rind. Chill till
partially set. Grate the apple. Pare the grapefruit—remove all
membrane—and cut into small segments. Fold apples and grapefruit
sections into gelatin. Turn into oiled one quart mold. Chill. Serves 6
to 8.


Cranberry-Chicken Party Salad

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


                             Chicken Layer

  2 envelopes unflavored gelatine
  ¼ cup cold water
  2 cans (2½ cups) condensed cream of chicken soup
  ¼ cup mayonnaise
  1 tablespoon minced parsley

Soften gelatine in water. Heat ¼ can soup; add gelatine and dissolve.
Stir dissolved gelatine into remaining soup; cool. Fold in mayonnaise
and parsley. Pour salad into a mold which has been rinsed with cold
water; chill until firm.


                            Cranberry Layer

  1 lb. can Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce
  1 envelope unflavored gelatine
  ¼ cup cold water

Crush cranberry sauce with a fork. Soften gelatine in cold water; set in
a pan of boiling water and stir until gelatine is dissolved. Mix
gelatine and cranberry sauce; pour on top of firm chicken layer;
continue to chill until cranberry layer is firm. Unmold; serve on
greens. 6 servings.


Cranberry Orange Salad

  1 pkg. raspberry flavored gelatin
  1 cup hot water
  ½ cup cold water
  1 14-oz. jar Ocean Spray Cranberry Orange Relish
  ½ cup chopped walnuts

Dissolve gelatin in 1 cup hot water; stir to dissolve. Add ½ cup water;
chill in refrigerator until partially thickened. Fold in cranberry
orange relish and chopped walnuts. Pour into large mold or individual
smaller molds and chill until firm. Serves 4 to 6.




                         CRANBERRY MAIN DISHES


Hamburgers Delish

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 lb. ground chuck or hamburg
  1 teaspoon onion salt
  ⅓ cup Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail

Mix above ingredients lightly with a fork. Shape into 4-6 patties and
broil or pan broil over medium heat until cooked to desired doneness.


Cranberry Sausage Corn Cake

  1 package corn muffin mix
  12 pork sausage links
  1 lb. can Ocean Spray Whole Cranberry Sauce

Bake corn muffin mix in 8 x 8 x 2″ pan until golden brown according to
directions on package. Fry sausages over low heat until brown and done.
Heat cranberry sauce. Cut corn bread into rectangles 2 x 4″ and arrange
on serving plates. Place 2 or 3 link sausages over each serving. Ladle
hot cranberry sauce over top and serve immediately. Makes 6 servings.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


Cranburgers

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  ⅔ cup evaporated milk (undiluted)
  2 slices white bread
  2 tablespoons instant minced onion
  1½ teaspoons salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  1½ lbs. ground meat

Pour evaporated milk over bread. Let stand to soften. Mix in onion,
salt, pepper and ground beef. Form into 8 patties. Broil 6 minutes on
one side. Turn and top with cranberry sauce or cranburger sauce and
broil 6 more minutes. Serve. These may also be baked. Place in shallow
pan and bake 15 minutes at 350°F. Turn, top with whole cranberry or
cranburger sauce and bake 15 minutes.


                            Cranburger Sauce

  1 1-lb. can Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce
  5 tablespoons A-1 Sauce
  1 tablespoon salad oil
  1 tablespoon brown sugar

Beat cranberry sauce in bowl with rotary beater until saucy. Beat in
remaining ingredients.


Chicken South Pacific

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 broiler chicken, cut in serving pieces
  ¼ cup cooking oil
  2 cups Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail, divided
  1 tablespoon cornstarch
  1 tablespoon soy sauce
  1 tablespoon vinegar
  1 tablespoon sugar
  ¼ cup blanched almonds
  ¾ cup raisins
  ¾ cup quick cooking rice
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 green pepper, sliced in rounds
  1 medium onion, sliced in rounds

Preheat fry pan containing cooking oil to 250°F. Place chicken in pan,
meat side down, raise temperature to 350°F. Cook, uncovered, for 10
minutes, turning so chicken is golden brown on all sides. Pour oil into
container for reuse. Add 1 cup of the cranberry juice which has been
mixed with cornstarch, soy sauce, vinegar and sugar to chicken in fry
pan. Cook, stirring, until mixture is slightly thickened; then turn heat
down to 250°F., cover, and simmer for 15 minutes. Add remaining
cranberry juice, almonds, raisins, rice, salt, green pepper and onion to
fry pan. Raise temperature to bring to a boil, then turn down to 250°F.
and cook 10 more minutes with lid. Turn off heat and let chicken stand
for 5 minutes before serving. Serves 4.


Elegante Chicken

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  3 broiler-fryer chickens, cut in serving pieces
  4 teaspoons salt, divided
  ½ cup butter or margarine
  1 cup Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail
  2 medium onions, sliced
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  1 teaspoon ginger
  2 medium green peppers, cut in strips
  4 teaspoons cornstarch
  ¼ cup water

Sprinkle chicken with 3 teaspoons of the salt. In large skillet, brown
chicken pieces in melted butter. Add cranberry juice cocktail. Add
onion, lemon juice, ginger and remaining 1 teaspoon salt. Cover and
simmer 30 minutes. Add green pepper; simmer 10 minutes longer. Blend
cornstarch and water; stir into chicken mixture. Serve with hot cooked
rice. Yield: 12 servings.


Cranberry Apricot Ham Glaze

  1 lb. can Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce
  ½ cup brown sugar
  ½ cup drained canned apricots, sieved or 1 can strained apricot baby
              food

Beat cranberry sauce with beater until “saucy” smooth. Add brown sugar
and sieved apricots. Spoon over ham the last half hour of baking or heat
and pour over ham slice just before serving.


Cranberry Ham Rolls

  4 tablespoons butter or margarine
  4 tablespoons onion, finely chopped
  4 tablespoons chopped celery
  2 cups rice, cooked
  Salt, pepper
  8 slices (⅛-inch slices) boned boiled ham
  Cranberry Glaze

Melt butter in small saucepan. Add onion and celery. Cook until soft.
Remove from heat. Add rice and seasoning. Spread on each ham slice. Roll
up. Fasten with toothpick. Place in greased shallow pan. Make Cranberry
Glaze. Spoon over ham rolls. Bake 15 to 20 minutes at 350°F. Makes 8
servings.

_Cranberry Glaze_: Crush contents of a 1-pound can Ocean Spray Jellied
Cranberry Sauce and add ½ cup brown sugar. Spoon over Ham Rolls before
baking.


Gourmet Ham

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  4 slices cooked ham (3″ rounds cut 1 inch thick)
  Cooked asparagus spears
  4 thick slices Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce
  4 thick slices cheddar cheese, halved
  Salt and pepper to taste

Place ham slices in flat casserole dish. Place 2 or 3 spears of hot
cooked asparagus on top of each, then a slice of cranberry sauce, then
cheese strips (in opposite direction so that cranberry sauce shows).
Place under broiler for several minutes until cheese melts or bake in
350°F. oven for 30 to 40 minutes. Serve immediately. Makes 4 servings.


Cranberry Almond Chicken

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 frying chicken (about 3 lbs.) cut up
  1 teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  1 teaspoon paprika
  ⅓ cup butter
  1 cup Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail
  ½ cup slivered almonds, toasted

Combine salt, pepper and paprika. Rub into chicken until coated. Melt
butter in frying pan. Sauté chicken pieces until golden brown on both
sides. Cover frying pan, reduce heat and cook for 25 to 30 minutes, or
until chicken is tender. Remove chicken to warm platter and keep hot in
warm oven. Pour cranberry cocktail into frying pan, stir to loosen all
browned particles. Cook over high heat until it is reduced by half. Pour
over chicken. Sprinkle with toasted slivered almonds. Serve at once.


Cranberry Chicken Curry

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  2 frying chickens (about 3 lbs. each) cut up
  2 teaspoons salt
  ½ teaspoon pepper
  2 teaspoons paprika
  ⅔ cup butter
  2 cups Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail
  1 cup slivered almonds, toasted

Combine salt, pepper and paprika. Rub into chicken until coated. Melt
butter in frying pan. Sauté chicken pieces until golden brown on both
sides. Cover frying pan, reduce heat and cook for 25 to 30 minutes, or
until chicken is tender. Remove chicken to warm platter and keep hot in
warm oven. Pour cranberry juice cocktail into frying pan, stir to
loosen all browned particles. Cook over high heat until juice is reduced
by half. Pour over chicken. Sprinkle with toasted slivered almonds.
Serve at once on hot curried rice.


                              Curried Rice

  2¼ cups rice
  ½ cup butter
  2 teaspoons curry powder
  1 teaspoon salt
  4½ cups chicken broth

In heavy pan cook rice in butter until golden brown, stirring as it
cooks. Add curry powder, salt and chicken broth. Bring to boil and cook
slowly until rice is tender and liquid absorbed—about 14 minutes. Makes
8 servings.


Chicken ’n Cheese Shortcake

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  12 (3-inch) squares cornbread, split in half, shortcake fashion
  4 cups cooked chicken or turkey meat
  4 cups shredded sharp cheese (about 1 lb.)
  2 (1 lb.) cans Ocean Spray Whole Cranberry Sauce, heated

Place buttered cornbread squares (split) on baking sheet. Distribute
chicken pieces over cornbread squares. Cover with shredded cheese. Broil
4 inches from heat source until cheese melts or bake ½ hour at 350°F.
Stack two squares high, shortcake fashion, on serving plate and top with
_hot_ cranberry sauce. Makes 12 servings.




                  CRANBERRY BREADS, CAKES AND COOKIES


Cranberry Nut Bread

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  2 cups sifted all-purpose flour
  ¾ cup granulated sugar
  3 teaspoons baking powder
  1 teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon baking soda
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  1 cup chopped walnuts
  1 egg
  1 cup Ocean Spray Whole Cranberry Sauce, drained
  2 tablespoons melted shortening

Heat oven to 350°F. Sift together onto waxed paper the flour, sugar,
baking powder, salt, soda and cinnamon. Add walnuts. In mixing bowl,
beat egg; add cranberry sauce and shortening. Add dry ingredients; stir
until just blended. Pour into greased 9 x 5 x 3″ loaf pan. Bake in
350°F. oven 45 minutes. Cool on rack.

Note: _1 teaspoon grated lemon rind may also be added. Use remaining ½
cup cranberry sauce to blend with 1 pkg. cream cheese. Use as a spread
for tea sandwiches._


Cranberry Glazed Rolls

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  ¼ cup chopped nuts
  ½ cup Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce
  ¼ cup brown sugar
  6 to 8 brown ’n serve rolls

Set oven at 400°F. Grease muffin pans or custard cups. Sprinkle a few
chopped nuts into each. Combine cranberry sauce that has been crushed
with a fork and brown sugar. Put a tablespoon of the mixture in each
muffin cup. Then turn brown ’n serve roll upside down and press into
each muffin cup. Bake at 400°F. for 12 to 15 minutes. Let cool for 4 to
5 minutes. Invert pans and gently remove rolls.


Cranberry Relish Ring

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 package hot roll mix
  Melted butter or margarine
  1 cup Ocean Spray Cranberry Orange Relish
  4 tablespoons brown sugar
  ½ cup chopped dates or raisins
  1 tablespoon flour

Prepare roll mix following package directions; let rise until doubled in
bulk. Knead on floured board. Roll out to oblong about 14 x 12 x ¼″.
Brush lightly with melted butter or margarine. Combine remaining
ingredients. Spread over dough. Roll up lengthwise. Place in circle,
seam side down, on well greased baking sheet. Snip into 1-inch slices
cutting almost through with scissors. Turn each section over on its
side. Cover and let rise until doubled in bulk. Bake in moderate oven
(350°F.) about 30 minutes. Spread with Almond flavored glaze, if
desired.

_Almond Glaze_: Blend together ¼ cup milk, ½ to 1 teaspoon Almond
extract and 2 cups sifted confectioners’ sugar until smooth.


Cranberry Tea Biscuits

  2 cups sifted all-purpose flour
  3 teaspoons baking powder
  ¼ teaspoon baking soda
  1 teaspoon salt
  3 tablespoons shortening
  1 egg
  1 cup Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce, crushed
  ¼ cup soured cream
  Grated cheese

Sift dry ingredients together, and cut in shortening. Beat egg until
creamy, add cranberry sauce and soured cream, and add to first mixture.
Roll out on floured board and cut into square biscuits. Place on baking
sheet and sprinkle with grated cheese. Bake 15 to 20 minutes at 400°F.


Spicy Cranberry Muffins

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 cup Ocean Spray Cranberry Orange Relish
  ¼ cup brown sugar
  1 tablespoon flour
  ½ cup chopped pecans
  2 cups packaged biscuit mix
  3 tablespoons sugar
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  ¼ teaspoon nutmeg
  1 egg
  ¾ cup milk

_Topping_: Combine cranberry orange relish, brown sugar, flour and
pecans. Spoon 1 tablespoon of mixture into each of 12 greased muffin pan
cups.

_Muffin_: Stir together biscuit mix, sugar, cinnamon and nutmeg. Stir
together egg and milk. Add to dry ingredients stirring just to moisten.
Fill muffin cups ⅔ full. Bake in hot oven (400°F.) 15 minutes. Remove
from oven and invert pan immediately. Makes 12 muffins.


Cranberry Igloos

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 1-lb. can Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce
  1 package of 6 sponge shells
  1 pint vanilla ice cream
  4 egg whites
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¼ cup brown sugar
  ¼ teaspoon vanilla
  ½ cup chopped nuts or coconut

Cut cranberry sauce into 6 slices and place one slice on each sponge
shell. Top each cranberry sauce slice with a scoop of vanilla ice cream.
Place in freezer. Before serving, beat egg whites with salt until foamy.
Add brown sugar gradually beating until mixture stands in rounded peaks.
Add vanilla and fold in chopped nuts or coconut. Place cranberry igloos
on a cooky sheet and cover completely with meringue. Bake in a 450°F.
oven for 5 minutes. Serve immediately. Makes 6 servings.


Autumn Spice Cakes

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 package spice cake mix or gingerbread mix
  Cream cheese (about 3 packages, 9 ounces)
  1 teaspoon grated orange rind
  1 lb. can Ocean Spray Whole Cranberry Sauce

Make spice cup cakes according to directions on package. When baked and
cool, frost with softened cream cheese (softened and creamed with top
milk or cream). Add grated orange rind to whole cranberry sauce. Spoon
cranberry sauce over spice cup cakes just before serving.


Inexpensive Cranberry Lemon Cake

  ¼ cup shortening
  1 cup sugar
  1 egg
  2 cups sifted all-purpose flour
  2 teaspoons baking powder
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¾ cup milk
  1 teaspoon lemon extract

Cream shortening and sugar until light and fluffy. Beat egg and add to
creamed mixture. Mix and sift the dry ingredients and add alternatively
with the milk to the first mixture. Add flavoring. Pour into greased
pan, 8 x 8 x 2″, and spread the following topping evenly and lightly
over the top of the batter.


                           Cranberry Topping

  3 tablespoons sugar
  1 teaspoon grated lemon rind
  ¼ teaspoon cinnamon
  Dash nutmeg
  ⅓ cup walnut meats, broken
  ⅔ cup Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce, diced

Mix sugar and lemon rind well. Add spices and walnut meats. Add
cranberry sauce last, just before spreading. Bake in a moderate oven
350°F. for 50 minutes, or until cake is done.


Cranberry Orange Spice Cake

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  ½ cup shortening
  1 cup sugar
  1 egg, beaten
  1 cup raisins
  ½ cup nut meats
  1¼ cups sifted all-purpose flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon soda
  1 teaspoon baking powder
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ teaspoon cloves
  1 14-oz. jar Ocean Spray Cranberry Orange Relish

Cream shortening and sugar, add egg. Stir in raisins and nuts. Combine
dry ingredients and sift; add to raisin mixture. Stir in cranberry
orange relish. Bake at 350°F. for about 1 hour in greased tube pan, or
in 2 greased 8″ layer cake pans for 30 to 40 minutes. Recipe will make
20 to 24 cupcakes.


Cranberry Frosty Pie

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 8″ baked pie shell, cooled
  1½ cups Cranberry Orange Relish
  1 pint softened vanilla ice cream

Fold cranberry orange relish into softened ice cream. Pour into pie
shell and freeze until firm. Decorate with whipped cream and fresh
cranberries.

_Cranberry Orange Relish_: Put through coarse blade of food chopper 4
cups (1 lb.) fresh uncooked cranberries and 2 oranges (seeds removed)
including rind. Stir in 2 cups sugar and chill. Makes about 2 pints.
Serve remaining relish with meat or poultry for a delightful salad.


Cranberry Chews

  2 eggs
  ¾ cup sugar
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  ¼ teaspoon ground nutmeg
  1½ cups packaged biscuit mix
  1 8-oz. can (1 cup) Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce, chilled and
              cut in ½ inch cubes
  1 cup chopped pecans
  Sifted confectioners’ sugar

Beat together eggs, sugar, lemon juice, and nutmeg till light and
fluffy. Stir in biscuit mix. Gently fold cranberry cubes into batter
along with pecans. Spread in greased and floured 13 x 9 x 2″ baking pan.
Bake in 350° oven for 20 to 25 minutes. Sprinkle with sifted
confectioners’ sugar. Cut into bars.


Cranberry Bars

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  2½ cups sifted all-purpose flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup butter or margarine
  ½ cup sugar
  ½ cup firmly packed brown sugar
  2 eggs
  ½ teaspoon vanilla extract
  14-oz. jar Ocean Spray Cranberry Orange Relish

Sift flour and salt. Cream butter in mixing bowl. Gradually add sugars;
continue beating until light and fluffy. Blend in eggs and vanilla. Add
dry ingredients and mix well. Chill. Roll out dough, half at a time, on
floured surface to a 16 x 9″ rectangle. Cut into three 16 x 3″ strips.
Spread cranberry orange relish filling down center of each strip. Fold
sides of dough over filling using spatula to lift sides, so they just
meet. Press together lightly. Cut into 2″ bars. Place seam side down on
ungreased cookie sheets. Repeat with remaining dough. Bake at 375°F. for
12 to 15 minutes, until lightly brown.


Cranberry Cheese Frosting for Spice Cakes

  3-oz. package cream cheese
  4 tablespoons Ocean Spray Whole Cranberry Sauce
  ⅛ teaspoon salt
  1 lb. sifted confectioners’ sugar

Soften cream cheese with cranberry sauce. Add salt. Gradually add sugar,
beating until creamy. Excellent frosting for spice cake.


Cranberry Fluff Frosting

  6 tablespoons butter or margarine
  2 teaspoons grated orange rind
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 lb. sifted confectioners’ sugar
  5 tablespoons Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail

Cream butter. Add orange rind and salt. Add sugar alternately with
cranberry cocktail. Beat until light and fluffy.


Cranberry Cream Topping

  1 cup heavy cream
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  ¼ cup confectioners’ sugar, sifted
  1 cup Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce, crushed with a fork

Whip heavy cream until stiff. Fold in lemon juice. Lightly fold in
crushed cranberry sauce and confectioners’ sugar. Serve as topping for
hot gingerbread.


Quick Cranberry Frosting

  1 cup Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce
  1 egg white
  ⅛ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon almond extract
  2 teaspoons lemon juice

Combine ingredients and beat with rotary beater or electric mixer until
frosting stands in peaks. Pile atop angel or sponge cake and serve.


Cranberry Frosting

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 cup Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce, beaten until smooth
  ½ cup brown sugar
  ¼ cup water
  1 egg white

Combine cranberry sauce, brown sugar and water. Bring slowly to a boil
and let cook for two minutes. Place unbeaten egg white in small deep
bowl of electric mixer. When cranberry syrup has cooked for two minutes,
pour slowly onto egg white and beat with mixer turned to medium speed.
As air is beaten into this frosting, the frosting will expand 3 to 4
times in volume. Beat with mixer turned to medium-fast speed until
frosting will stand in peaks ... 8 to 10 minutes.

A fluffy pink frosting for spice or chocolate cake.




                           CRANBERRY DESSERTS


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


Cranberry Cheese Pie


                        9″ Graham Cracker Crust

  1¼ cups graham cracker crumbs
  3 tablespoons sugar
  6 tablespoons butter or margarine, melted

Combine crumbs and sugar in medium sized bowl. Stir in melted butter
until thoroughly blended. Pack mixture firmly into 9-inch pie pan and
press firmly to bottom and sides. Bake in 350°F. oven 8 minutes. Cool.


                                Filling

  1½ 8-oz. pkgs. cream cheese
  2 eggs
  ½ cup sugar
  ½ teaspoon vanilla
  1 pint sour cream
  Cranberry Topping

Let cream cheese soften at room temperature. Beat until smooth. Add eggs
and beat well. Gradually mix in sugar and vanilla. Beat until light and
fluffy. Fold in sour cream. Pour into cooled graham cracker crust. Bake
at 375°F. for 30 to 35 minutes or until center is firm. Cool. Just
before serving spoon cranberry topping over pie.


                           Cranberry Topping

  1 tablespoon cornstarch
  3 tablespoons sugar
  ½ teaspoon grated orange rind or vanilla
  1 lb. can Ocean Spray Whole Cranberry Sauce

Stir cornstarch, sugar, grated orange rind or vanilla and whole
cranberry sauce together in saucepan. Cook slowly, stirring constantly,
until mixture thickens (about 5 minutes). Cool. Spoon over Cheese Pie
just before serving.


Cranberry Crunch

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 cup uncooked rolled oats
  ½ cup all-purpose flour
  1 cup brown sugar
  ⅓ cup butter
  1 lb. can Ocean Spray Cranberry Sauce (Jellied or Whole)
  1 quart vanilla ice cream

Heat oven to 350°F. Mix oats, flour and brown sugar. Cut in butter until
crumbly. Place half of this mixture in an 8 x 8″ greased cake dish.
Cover with cranberry sauce. Top with balance of mixture. Bake 45 minutes
at 350°F. Serve hot in squares topped with scoops of vanilla ice cream.
Serves 6 to 8.


Cranberry Prune Whip

  1 cup cooked prunes
  1 cup Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce
  Dash salt
  2 egg whites
  ¼ cup chopped nut meats

Pit prunes. Press prunes and cranberry sauce through sieve. Add salt.
Beat egg whites stiff. Beat fruit mixture into egg whites a small
portion at a time. Mixture will increase in volume with beating. Fold
nut meats into whip. Chill. Serve soon after preparation with custard
made from leftover egg yolks. Serves 4.


Cranberry Bavarian Cream

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 pint Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail
  1 package lemon gelatin
  ¼ cup sugar
  Dash salt
  1 cup heavy cream, whipped

Heat cranberry cocktail to boiling point. Dissolve lemon gelatin, sugar
and salt in the hot cocktail. Chill mixture until syrupy, stirring
frequently. Fold whipped cream into the mixture and pour into a
well-oiled 1-quart mold. Chill 4 hours, and unmold the Bavarian on a
serving dish. Cranberry Bavarian can also be chilled in a large dessert
dish and then spooned into individual serving dishes. It is especially
nice garnished with whipped cream or coconut and served with crisp
cookies.


Winter Shortcake

  1 cup canned crushed pineapple (9-oz. can)
  1 cup Ocean Spray Whole Cranberry Sauce
  1 cup finely chopped or shredded red-skinned apple (1 medium to large
              apple)

Combine ingredients and let stand at room temperature ½ to 1 hour before
serving. Make fruit shortcakes (individual). Split biscuits while piping
hot and serve shortcake style with the fruit mixture. Serves 6.


Cranberry Rice Dessert

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 cup cooked rice
  1 can (1-lb.) Ocean Spray Whole Cranberry Sauce, drained
  ½ cup heavy cream, whipped
  1 dozen diced marshmallows

Combine rice and whole cranberry sauce. Fold in whipped cream and diced
marshmallows. Spoon into individual sherbet dishes. Makes 4 servings.


Cranberry Coeur A La Creme

  1 pint cottage cheese, sieved
  1 cup commercial soured cream
  ⅛ teaspoon salt
  1 envelope unflavored gelatine
  ¼ cup milk
  1 (1-lb.) can Ocean Spray Whole Cranberry Sauce, chilled

Put cottage cheese through sieve. Add to soured cream, add salt. Beat
until smooth. Sprinkle gelatine over milk (to soften) in Pyrex cup.
Place cup in pan of hot water until gelatine dissolves. Blend into
cottage cheese mixture. Rinse small bowl (about 1 pint capacity) with
cold water. Pour mixture into bowl. Chill until firm. Unmold when ready
to serve. Top with a spoonful of cranberry sauce. Serve remaining sauce
in bowl to spoon over wedges.


Tropical Sherbet

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 (3-oz.) package raspberry flavored gelatin
  ½ cup hot water
  ¼ cup lemon juice
  1 pint soured cream
  2 egg whites, beaten ’til stiff
  1 cup Ocean Spray Cranberry Orange Relish
  1 tablespoon crystallized ginger, chopped

Put large bowl and beater into refrigerator to chill. Dissolve gelatin
in hot water; add lemon juice and soured cream. Pour into refrigerator
tray and freeze to mushy stage. Remove gelatin mixture and beat until
light and fluffy. Fold in beaten egg whites, cranberry relish and
crystallized ginger. Return to trays and freeze. Serve with chicken or
pork or as a light dessert.


Cranberry Orange Sherbet

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 large orange
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  1 3-oz. package orange flavored gelatin
  1 pint vanilla ice cream
  1 14-oz. jar Ocean Spray Cranberry Orange Relish

Peel and dice orange, reserving juice. Combine orange juice, lemon juice
and enough water to make 1 cup. Heat to boiling point. Pour over gelatin
and stir to dissolve. Add to ice cream, mix till well blended. Chill in
freezer until the consistency of egg white. Fold in diced orange and
cranberry orange relish. Pour into refrigerator tray and freeze.




                          CRANBERRY BEVERAGES


Cranberry Appe-teaser

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  2 cups (1 pint) Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail
  2 cups orange juice
  4 thin slices of lemon
  1 tablespoon sugar
  ¼ teaspoon cinnamon
  Dash nutmeg

Mix all ingredients in saucepan. Simmer slowly for 10 minutes. Remove
lemon slices. Serve hot with orange garnish. Makes 1 quart. Serve cold:
Simmer lemon, sugar, spices with 1 cup of the cranberry juice. Add
remaining fruit juices. Chill. Serve over ice mold or cubes.


Cranberry Iced Tea

In large pitchers mix together equal portions of chilled Ocean Spray
Cranberry Juice Cocktail and cold tea. Pour over ice cubes in tall
glasses to serve.


The Cape Codder

  2 jiggers Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail
  1 jigger vodka (rum, if you prefer)

Serve over the rocks or tall with soda. A splash of lime or lemon
optional.


Cranberry Fruit Punch

  1 quart Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail
  1 pint orange juice
  ¾ cup lemon juice
  1 cup pineapple juice
  ½ cup sugar
  1 to 2 cups water

Stir thoroughly and serve over crushed ice or ice cubes. Makes 8 to 12
servings.


Cranberry Rum Punch

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1¼ cups tea (made with 1 teaspoon instant tea)
  2 cups Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail
  ¼ cup orange juice
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  2 tablespoons sugar
  dash cinnamon
  dash allspice
  dash nutmeg
  2 ounces Bacardi rum

Combine all ingredients and mix well. Serve over ice cubes. Makes 4
servings.


Hot Buttered Punch

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  ¾ cup brown sugar, firmly packed
  1 cup water
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon nutmeg
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ teaspoon allspice
  ¾ teaspoon cloves
  2 1-lb. cans Ocean Spray Jellied Cranberry Sauce
  3 cups water
  1 quart pineapple juice
  Cinnamon sticks
  Butter or margarine

Bring to a boil sugar, water, salt, spices. Beat cranberry sauce with
beater until “saucy.” Add water and beat until smooth. Add cranberry
liquid and pineapple juice to hot spiced syrup and simmer about 5
minutes. Keep steaming hot over hot water. To serve: ladle punch into
mugs. Add dots of butter or margarine. Serve with cinnamon stick
stirrers. Yield: 2½ quarts.


Cranberry Tickle

(Yogurt gives this drink the tickle)

  2 cups (1 pint) Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail, chilled
  1 cup yogurt
  2 eggs
  ½ cup granulated sugar
  ½ teaspoon ground nutmeg

Combine all ingredients in a blender, whirl at top speed for 30 seconds.
Serve immediately in tall glasses. Suggested garnish: sprinkle of
nutmeg. Serves 4.


Holiday Punch

  1 quart Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail
  1 pint lime sherbet

Chill cranberry juice cocktail in refrigerator until serving time. Pour
into punch bowl. Float small lime sherbet scoops on top of the cranberry
juice. To serve, ladle juice and 1 scoop sherbet into each punch cup.
Makes 10-12 servings.


Pink Cooler

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  3 ounces of white Muscatel
  3 ounces of Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail

Pour over ice cubes in a tall glass, stir, serve.


Cranberry Collins

  2 oz. Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail
  1 oz. lemon juice
  1 heaping teaspoon powdered sugar
  2 oz. Vodka

Shake with plenty of ice and pour unstrained into Collins glass. Fill
with sparkling water, stir and serve.


Three Fruit Punch

(For those who like a ‘float’ of ice cream)

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  4 cups (1 quart) Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail, chilled
  ⅔ cup pineapple juice, chilled
  ⅔ cup apple juice, chilled
  2 cups (1 pint) vanilla ice cream

Combine cranberry juice cocktail, pineapple juice and apple juice. Pour
into tall glasses and top with scoops of vanilla ice cream. Serves 4.


Frozen Fire

(A firecracker red drink for those special holidays)

  8 cups (2 quarts) Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail, chilled
  2 cups (1 pint) raspberry sherbet
  3 cups raspberry soda, chilled

Combine cranberry juice cocktail and raspberry sherbet and beat together
until smooth and well blended. Add raspberry soda. Serve at once in tall
glasses. Suggested garnish: pineapple spears. Serves 12.


Cranberry Sangria

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  6 quarts Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail, chilled
  1 cup honey
  1½ teaspoons almond extract
  Ice cubes
  Lemon, orange and lime slices, halved
  Chilled club soda

Combine cranberry juice cocktail, honey and almond. Chill. When ready to
serve, pour 1 cup (8 ounces) into a tall glass. Add 2 or 3 ice cubes,
half slices of lemon, orange and lime and a splash of club soda. Serves
24.


Cranberry-Apple Twirl

(Whirl a twirl)

  2 cups (1 pint) Ocean Spray Cranapple
  2 cups (1 pint) lemon sherbet, softened

Combine ingredients in a blender and whirl at top speed for 30 seconds.
Pour into tall glasses and serve at once. Suggested garnish: ground
cinnamon. Serves 4.


Cranberry Apple Soda

  2 cups Ocean Spray Cranapple, chilled
  ½ cup applesauce
  1 cup orange juice, chilled
  4 scoops vanilla ice cream

Mix cranapple, applesauce and orange juice. Pour into 4 glasses and top
each glass with a scoop of vanilla ice cream. Serve with straws. Serves
4.


Hot Mulled Cranberry Punch

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  1 quart Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail
  1 can (6 ounces) frozen concentrated pink lemonade
  1 cup grape juice
  1½ cups water
  2 cinnamon sticks
  10 whole cloves
  Lemon slices

Combine all ingredients in a saucepan. Bring to a boil, lower heat and
simmer 10 minutes. Remove spices and serve at once garnished with lemon
slices. Serves 8.


Ranchhouse Punch

  6 quarts Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail, chilled
  2 cups (1 pint) strawberry soda syrup
  Crushed ice
  Chilled lemon-lime soda
  Pineapple chunks

Mix cranberry juice cocktail and syrup. Chill. Pour 1 cup (8 ounces) of
the mixture into a tall glass. Add crushed ice and fill to the top with
7-Up. Add pineapple chunks. Serve with straws.


Cranberry Cola

(New cola combo)

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  2 cups (1 pint) Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail, chilled
  2 cups cola beverage, chilled
  Juice of 1 small lemon

Combine all ingredients and stir to blend. Pour into tall glasses. Serve
with ice cubes. Serves 4.


Hobgoblin Grog

(No tricks to this treat)

  6 cups (1½ quarts) Ocean Spray Crangrape
  2 cups Ocean Spray Indian River grapefruit juice
  1 lemon, cut into thin slices

Combine all ingredients and heat to the boiling point. Remove lemon
slices and pour mixture into mugs. Serve hot. Serves 8.


Cranapple Bounce

(Soak bananas in lemon juice after peeling, to hold the color)

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  6 cups (1½ quarts) Ocean Spray Cranapple, chilled
  Juice of 2 limes
  2 tablespoons granulated sugar
  2 very ripe bananas
  1 tablespoon rum flavoring

Combine cranapple, lime juice and sugar. Sieve bananas, and stir into
cranapple mixture until sugar is dissolved. (Or combine cranapple, lime
juice, sugar and bananas and whirl in a blender.) Blend in rum
flavoring. Place ice cubes in a bowl; add cranapple mixture. Stir well.
Serve in tall glasses. Suggested garnish: sliced bananas and mint
sprigs. Serves 8.


Cran-Grapefruit Tonic

(Serve in your longest, tallest, thinnest glasses)

  2 cups (1 pint) Ocean Spray Cranberry Juice Cocktail, chilled
  2 cups Ocean Spray Indian River grapefruit juice, chilled
  2 cups tonic water, chilled

Combine cranberry juice cocktail with grapefruit juice. Stir in tonic
water. Pour into tall glasses; add ice cubes. Serve at once. Serves 6.


Spicy Cranberry Glow

(Spiced apple rings for gourmets)

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

  4 cups (1 quart) Ocean Spray Cranberry juice Cocktail
  ⅓ cup granulated sugar
  Juice of 1 lemon
  3 whole cloves
  2 cinnamon sticks
  2 teaspoons brandy extract or ½ cup brandy

Combine all ingredients and bring to a boil; lower heat and simmer 5
minutes. Remove spices and serve hot in large mugs. Suggested garnish:
spiced apple rings. Serves 4.


Crangrape Mixer

(A sparkling cooler)

  2 cups (1 pint) Ocean Spray Crangrape, chilled
  4 teaspoons instant unsweetened tea, lemon flavor
  2 cups (1 pint) ginger ale, chilled

Combine crangrape and tea and stir until dissolved. Stir in ginger ale.
Pour into tall glasses. Add ice cubes. Serves 4.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

    [Illustration: Ocean Spray]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALL-TIME FAVORITE CRANBERRY RECIPES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.