ADDRESS OF PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT AT
            CANTON, OHIO [Illustration] SEPTEMBER 30, 1907


                            [Illustration]


                              WASHINGTON
                      GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                 1907




We have gathered together to-day to pay our meed of respect and
affection to the memory of William McKinley, who as President won
a place in the hearts of the American people such as but three or
four of all the Presidents of this country have ever won. He was of
singular uprightness and purity of character, alike in public and in
private life; a citizen who loved peace, he did his duty faithfully
and well for four years of war when the honor of the nation called
him to arms. As Congressman, as governor of his State, and finally as
President, he rose to the foremost place among our statesmen, reaching
a position which would satisfy the keenest ambition; but he never lost
that simple and thoughtful kindness toward every human being, great or
small, lofty or humble, with whom he was brought in contact, which
so endeared him to our people. He had to grapple with more serious
and complex problems than any President since Lincoln, and yet, while
meeting every demand of statesmanship, he continued to live a beautiful
and touching family life, a life very healthy for this nation to see
in its foremost citizen; and now the woman who walked in the shadow
ever after his death, the wife to whom his loss was a calamity more
crushing than it could be to any other human being, lies beside him
here in the same sepulcher.

There is a singular appropriateness in the inscription on his monument.
Mr. Cortelyou, whose relations with him were of such close intimacy,
gives me the following information about it: On the President’s trip
to the Pacific slope in the spring of 1901 President Wheeler, of the
University of California, conferred the degree of LL. D. upon him
in words so well chosen that they struck the fastidious taste of
John Hay, then Secretary of State, who wrote and asked for a copy of
them from President Wheeler. On the receipt of this copy he sent the
following letter to President McKinley, a letter which now seems filled
with a strange and unconscious prescience:

    DEAR MR. PRESIDENT:

    President Wheeler sent me the inclosed at my request. You
    will have the words in more permanent shape. They seem to me
    remarkably well chosen, and stately and dignified enough to
    serve――long hence, please God――as your epitaph.

                          Yours, faithfully,
                                                     JOHN HAY.


                      “UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA,
                                    “_Office of the President_.

    “By authority vested in me by the regents of the University
    of California, I confer the degree of Doctor of Laws upon
    William McKinley, President of the United States, a statesman
    singularly gifted to unite the discordant forces of the
    Government and mold the diverse purposes of men toward
    progressive and salutary action, a magistrate whose poise
    of judgment has been tested and vindicated in a succession
    of national emergencies; good citizen, brave soldier, wise
    executive, helper and leader of men, exemplar to his people of
    the virtues that build and conserve the state, society, and the
    home.

    “Berkeley, May 15, 1901.”

It would be hard to imagine an epitaph which a good citizen would
be more anxious to deserve or one which would more happily describe
the qualities of that great and good citizen whose life we here
commemorate. He possessed to a very extraordinary degree the gift of
uniting discordant forces and securing from them a harmonious action
which told for good government. From purposes not merely diverse, but
bitterly conflicting, he was able to secure healthful action for the
good of the State. In both poise and judgment he rose level to the
several emergencies he had to meet as leader of the nation, and like
all men with the root of true greatness in them he grew to steadily
larger stature under the stress of heavy responsibilities. He was
a good citizen and a brave soldier, a Chief Executive whose wisdom
entitled him to the trust which he received throughout the nation. He
was not only a leader of men but preeminently a helper of men; for
one of his most marked traits was the intensely human quality of his
wide and deep sympathy. Finally, he not merely preached, he was, that
most valuable of all citizens in a democracy like ours, a man who in
the highest place served as an unconscious example to his people of
the virtues that build and conserve alike our public life, and the
foundation of all public life, the intimate life of the home.

Many lessons are taught us by his career, but none more valuable than
the lesson of broad human sympathy for and among all of our citizens of
all classes and creeds. No other President has ever more deserved to
have his life work characterized in Lincoln’s words as being carried
on “with malice toward none, with charity toward all.” As a boy he
worked hard with his hands; he entered the Army as a private soldier;
he knew poverty; he earned his own livelihood; and by his own exertions
he finally rose to the position of a man of moderate means. Not merely
was he in personal touch with farmer and town dweller, with capitalist
and wageworker, but he felt an intimate understanding of each, and
therefore an intimate sympathy with each; and his consistent effort was
to try to judge all by the same standard and to treat all with the
same justice. Arrogance toward the weak, and envious hatred of those
well off, were equally abhorrent to his just and gentle soul.

Surely this attitude of his should be the attitude of all our people
to-day. It would be a cruel disaster to this country to permit
ourselves to adopt an attitude of hatred and envy toward success
worthily won, toward wealth honestly acquired. Let us in this respect
profit by the example of the republics of this Western Hemisphere
to the south of us. Some of these republics have prospered greatly;
but there are certain ones that have lagged far behind, that still
continue in a condition of material poverty, of social and political
unrest and confusion. Without exception the republics of the former
class are those in which honest industry has been assured of reward
and protection; those where a cordial welcome has been extended to
the kind of enterprise which benefits the whole country, while
incidentally, as is right and proper, giving substantial rewards
to those who manifest it. On the other hand, the poor and backward
republics, the republics in which the lot of the average citizen is
least desirable, and the lot of the laboring man worst of all, are
precisely those republics in which industry has been killed because
wealth exposed its owner to spoliation. To these communities foreign
capital now rarely comes, because it has been found that as soon as
capital is employed so as to give substantial remuneration to those
supplying it, it excites ignorant envy and hostility, which result in
such oppressive action, within or without the law, as sooner or later
to work a virtual confiscation. Every manifestation of feeling of this
kind in our civilization should be crushed at the outset by the weight
of a sensible public opinion.

From the standpoint of our material prosperity there is only one other
thing as important as the discouragement of a spirit of envy and
hostility toward honest business men, toward honest men of means; this
is the discouragement of dishonest business men.

Wait a moment; I don’t want you to applaud this part unless you are
willing to applaud also the part I read first, to which you listened in
silence. I want you to understand that I will stand just as straight
for the rights of the honest man who wins his fortune by honest
methods as I will stand against the dishonest man who wins a fortune
by dishonest methods. And I challenge the right to your support in one
attitude just as much as in the other. I am glad you applauded when you
did, but I want you to go back now and applaud the other statement. I
will read a little of it over again. “Every manifestation of ignorant
envy and hostility toward honest men who acquire wealth by honest means
should be crushed at the outset by the weight of a sensible public
opinion.” Thank you. Now I’ll go on.

From the standpoint of our material prosperity there is only one other
thing as important as the discouragement of a spirit of envy and
hostility toward honest business men, toward honest men of means, and
that is the discouragement of dishonest business men, the war upon the
chicanery and wrongdoing which are peculiarly repulsive, peculiarly
noxious when exhibited by men who have no excuse of want, of poverty,
of ignorance for their crimes. My friends, I will wage war against
those dishonest men to the utmost extent of my ability, and I will
stand no less stoutly in defense of honest men, rich or poor. Men of
means and, above all, men of great wealth can exist in safety under
the peaceful protection of the state only in orderly societies, where
liberty manifests itself through and under the law. That is what you
fought for, you veterans. You fought for the supremacy of the national
law in every corner of this Republic. It is these men, the men of
wealth, who more than any others, should in the interest of the class
to which they belong, in the interest of their children and their
children’s children, seek in every way, but especially in the conduct
of their lives, to insist upon and to build up respect for the law. It
is an extraordinary thing, a very extraordinary thing, that it should
be necessary for me to utter as simple a truth as that; yet it is
necessary. It may not be true from the standpoint of some particular
individual of this class of very wealthy men, but in the long run it
is preeminently true from the standpoint of the class as a whole, no
less than of the country as a whole, that it is a veritable calamity
to achieve a temporary triumph by violation or evasion of the law, and
we are the best friends of the man of property, we show ourselves the
staunchest upholders of the rights of property when we set our faces
like flint against those offenders who do wrong in order to acquire
great wealth, or who use this wealth as a help to wrongdoing.

I sometimes feel that I have trenched a little on your province,
Brother Bristol, and on that of your brethren, by preaching. But
whenever I speak of the wrongdoing of a man of wealth or of a man of
poverty, poor man or rich man, I always want to try to couple together
the fact that wrongdoing is wrong just as much in one case as in the
other, with the fact that right is just as much right in one case as
in the other. I want the plain people of this country, I want all of us
who do not have great wealth, to remember that in our own interest, and
because it is right, we must be just as scrupulous in doing justice to
the man of great wealth as in exacting justice from him.

Wrongdoing is confined to no class. Good and evil are to be found among
both rich and poor, and in drawing the line among our fellows we must
draw it on conduct and not on worldly possessions. Woe to this country
if we ever get to judging men by anything save their worth as men,
without regard to their fortune in life. In other words, my plea is
that you draw the line on conduct and not on worldly possessions. In
the abstract most of us will admit this. It is a rather more difficult
proposition in the concrete. We can act upon such doctrines only if we
really have knowledge of, and sympathy with, one another. If both the
wage-worker and the capitalist are able to enter each into the other’s
life, to meet him so as to get into genuine sympathy with him, most of
the misunderstanding between them will disappear and its place will be
taken by a judgment broader, juster, more kindly, and more generous;
for each will find in the other the same essential human attributes
that exist in himself. It was President McKinley’s peculiar glory that
in actual practice he realized this as it is given to but few men to
realize it; that his broad and deep sympathies made him feel a genuine
sense of oneness with all his fellow-Americans, whatever their station
or work in life, so that to his soul they were all joined with him in
a great brotherly democracy of the spirit. It is not given to many of
us in our lives actually to realize this attitude to the extent that he
did; but we can at least have it before us as the goal of our endeavor,
and by so doing we shall pay honor better than in any other way to
the memory of the dead President whose services in life we this day
commemorate.


                            [Illustration]




 Transcriber’s Notes:

 ――Text in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).

 ――Punctuation and spelling inaccuracies were silently corrected.

 ――Archaic and variable spelling has been preserved.

 ――Variations in hyphenation and compound words have been preserved.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADDRESS OF PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT AT CANTON, OHIO, SEPTEMBER 30, 1907 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.