ADDRESS OF PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT AT
            CAIRO, ILLINOIS [Illustration] OCTOBER 3, 1907


                            [Illustration]


                              WASHINGTON
                      GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                 1907




MEN OF ILLINOIS, AND YOU, MEN OF KENTUCKY AND MISSOURI:

I am glad to have the chance to speak to you to-day. This is the heart
of what may be called the Old West, which we now call the Middle West,
using the term to denote that great group of rich and powerful States
which literally forms the heart of the country. It is a region whose
people are distinctively American in all their thoughts, in all their
ways of looking at life; and in its past and its present alike it is
typical of our country. The oldest men present can still remember the
pioneer days, the days of the white-tilted ox wagon, of the emigrant,
and of the log cabin in which that emigrant first lived when he settled
to his task as a pioneer farmer. They were rough days, days of hard
work, and the people who did that work seemed themselves uncouth and
forbidding to visitors who could not look below the surface. It is
curious and amusing to think that even as genuine a lover of his kind,
a man normally so free from national prejudices as Charles Dickens,
should have selected the region where we are now standing as the seat
of his forlorn “Eden” in Martin Chuzzlewit. The country he so bitterly
assailed is now one of the most fertile and productive portions of
one of the most fertile and productive agricultural territories
in all the world, and the dwellers in this territory represent a
higher average of comfort, intelligence, and sturdy capacity for
self-government than the people in any tract of like extent in any
other continent. The land teems with beauty and fertility, and but a
score of years after Dickens wrote it was shown to be a nursery and
breeding ground of heroes, of soldiers and statesmen of the highest
rank, while the rugged worth of the rank and file of the citizenship
rendered possible the deeds of the mighty men who led in council and in
battle. This was the region that brought forth mighty Abraham Lincoln,
the incarnation of all that is best in democratic life; and from the
loins of the same people, living only a little farther south, sprang
another of our greatest Presidents, Andrew Jackson, “Old Hickory”――a
man who made mistakes, like most strong men, but a man of iron will
and incorruptible integrity, fearless, upright, devoted to the welfare
of his countrymen, bone of our bone and flesh of our flesh, a typical
American if ever there was one.

I commend a careful reading of Martin Chuzzlewit to the pessimists of
to-day, to the men who, instead of fighting hard to do away with abuses
while at the same time losing no jot of their buoyant hopefulness for
the country, insist that all our people, socially and industrially, in
their private lives no less than as politicians, newspaper men, and
business men, are at a lower ebb than ever before. If ever any one
of you feels a little downcast over the peculiarly gloomy view of the
present taken by some well-meaning pessimist of to-day, you will find
it a real comfort to read Martin Chuzzlewit, to see what a well-meaning
pessimist of the past thought of our people sixty-five years ago; and
then think of the extraordinary achievement, the extraordinary gain,
morally no less than materially, of those sixty-five years. Dickens
can be read by us now with profit; Elijah Pogram, Hannibal Chollop,
Jefferson Brick and Scadder have their representatives to-day, plenty
of them; and the wise thing for us to do is to recognize that these
are still types of evil in politics, journalism, business, and private
life, and to war against them with all our hearts. But it is rank folly
to regard these as the only, or the chief, types in our national life.
It was not of much consequence whether Dickens made such an error or
not, but it would be of great consequence if we ourselves did; for a
foolish pessimism is an even greater foe of healthy national growth
than a foolish optimism. It was not that Dickens invented characters
or scenes that had no basis in fact; on the contrary, what he said was
true, as far as it went; the trouble was that out of many such half
truths he made a picture which as a whole was absurd; for often a half
truth is the most dangerous falsehood. It would be simply silly to be
angry over Martin Chuzzlewit; on the contrary, read it, be amused
by it, profit by it; and don’t be misled by it. Keep a lively watch
against the present-day Pograms and Bricks; but above all, distrust
the man who would persuade you to feel downhearted about the country
because of these same Pograms and Bricks, past or present. It would be
foolish to ignore their existence, or the existence of anything else
that is bad in our national life; but it would be even more foolish
to ignore the vaster forces that tell for righteousness. Friends,
there is every reason why we should fight whatever is evil in the
present. But there is also every reason why we should feel a sturdy and
confident hope for the future. There are many wrongs to right; there
are many and powerful wrong doers against whom to war; and it would be
base to shrink from the contest, or to fail to wage it with a high, a
resolute will. But I am sure that we shall win in the contest, because
I know that the heart of our people is sound. Our average men and women
are good men and women――and this is true in all sections of our country
and among all classes of our countrymen. There is no other nation on
earth with such vast natural resources, or with such a high standard
of living and of industrial efficiency among its workers. We have as
a nation an era of unexampled prosperity ahead of us; we shall enjoy
it, and our children will enjoy it after us. The trend of well-being
in this country is upward, not downward; and this is the trend in the
things of the soul as well as in the things of the body.

Government in its application is often a complicated and delicate
work, but the principles of government are, after all, fairly simple.
In a broad general way we should apply in the affairs of the national
administration, which deals with the interests of all our eighty-odd
millions of people, just the same rules that are necessary in getting
on with our neighbors in our several neighborhoods; and the nation as a
whole should show substantially the same qualities that we would expect
an honorable man to show in dealing with his fellows. To illustrate
this, consider for a moment two phases of governmental action.

First as to international affairs. Among your own neighbors, among your
friends, what is the attitude you like to see a man take toward his
fellows, the attitude you wish each of your sons to take when he goes
out into the world? Is it not a combination of readiness and ability
to hold his own if anyone tries to wrong him, while at the same time
showing careful regard not only for the rights but for the feelings of
others? Of course it is! Of course the type of man whom we respect,
whom we are proud of if he is a kinsman, whom we are glad to have as a
friend and neighbor, is the man who is no milksop, who is not afraid,
who will not tolerate nor hesitate to resent insult or injury, but
who himself never inflicts insult or injury, is kindly, good-natured,
thoughtful of others’ rights――in short, a good man to do business with
or have live in the next house or have as a friend. On the other hand,
the man who lacks any of those qualities is sure to be objectionable.
If a man is afraid to hold his own, if he will submit tamely to
wrongdoing, he is contemptible. If he is a bully, an oppressor, a man
who wrongs or insults others, he is even worse and should be hunted
out of the community. But, on the whole, the most contemptible position
that can possibly be assumed by any man is that of blustering, of
bragging, of insulting or wronging other people, while yet expecting to
go through life unchallenged, and being always willing to back down and
accept humiliation if readiness to make good is demanded.

Well, all this is just as true of a nation as of an individual, and
in dealing with other nations we should act as we expect a man who
is both game and decent to act in private life. There are few things
cheaper and more objectionable, whether on the part of the public man
or of the private man, on the part of a writer or of a speaker, an
individual or a group of individuals, than a course of conduct which
is insulting or hurtful, whether in speech or act, to individuals
of another nation or to the representatives of another nation or to
another nation itself. But the policy becomes infamous from the
standpoint of the interests of the United States when it is combined
with the refusal to take those measures of preparation which can alone
secure us from aggression on the part of others. The policy of “peace
with insult” is the very worst policy upon which it is possible to
embark, whether for a nation or an individual. To be rich, unarmed, and
yet insolent and aggressive, is to court well-nigh certain disaster.
The only safe and honorable rule of foreign policy for the United
States is to show itself courteous toward other nations, scrupulous not
to infringe upon their rights, and yet able and ready to defend its
own. This nation is now on terms of the most cordial good will with all
other nations. Let us make it a prime object of our policy to preserve
these conditions. To do so it is necessary on the one hand to mete out
a generous justice to all other peoples and show them courtesy and
respect; and on the other hand, as we are yet a good way off from the
millenium, to keep ourselves in such shape as to make it evident to
all men that we desire peace because we think it is just and right and
not from motives of weakness or timidity. As for the first requisite,
this means that not only the Government but the people as a whole shall
act in the needed spirit; for otherwise the folly of a few individuals
may work lasting discredit to the whole nation. The second requisite
is more easily secured――let us build up and maintain at the highest
point of efficiency the United States Navy. In any great war on land
we should have to rely in the future as we have relied in the past
chiefly upon volunteer soldiers; and although it is indispensable that
our little army, an army ludicrously small relatively to the wealth
and population of this mighty nation, should itself be trained to the
highest point and should be valued and respected as is demanded by
the worth of the officers and enlisted men, yet it is not necessary
that this army should be large as compared to the armies of other
great nations. But as regards the Navy all this is different. We have
an enormous coast line, and our coast line is on two great oceans.
To repel hostile attacks the fortifications, and not the Navy, must
be used; but the best way to parry is to hit――no fight can ever be
won except by hitting――and we can only hit by means of the Navy. It
is utterly impossible to improvise even a makeshift navy under the
conditions of modern warfare. Since the days of Napoleon no war between
two great powers has lasted as long as it would take to build a battle
ship, let alone a fleet of battle ships; and it takes just as long to
train the crew of a battle ship as it does to build it; and as regards
the most important thing of all, the training of the officers, it takes
much longer. The Navy must be built and all its training given in time
of peace. When once war has broken out it is too late to do anything.
We now have a good Navy, not yet large enough for our needs, but of
excellent material. Where a navy is as small as ours, the cardinal
rule must be that the battle ships shall not be separated. This year
I am happy to say that we shall begin a course which I hope will be
steadily followed hereafter, that, namely, of keeping the battle-ship
fleet alternately in the Pacific and in the Atlantic. Early in December
the fleet will begin its voyage to the Pacific, and it will number,
friends, among its formidable fighting craft three great battle
ships, named, respectively, the _Illinois_, the _Missouri_, and the
_Kentucky_. It is a national fleet in every sense of the term, and its
welfare should be, and I firmly believe is, as much a matter of pride
and concern for every man in the farthest interior of our country as
for every man on the seacoast. A long ocean voyage is mighty good
training; and not the least good it will do will be to show just the
points where our naval program needs strengthening. Incidentally I
think the voyage will have one good effect, for, to judge by their
comments on the movement, some excellent people in my own section of
the country need to be reminded that the Pacific coast is exactly as
much a part of this nation as the Atlantic coast.

So much for foreign affairs. Now for a matter of domestic policy.
Here in this country we have founded a great federal democratic
republic. It is a government by and for the people and therefore a
genuine democracy; and the theory of our Constitution is that each
neighborhood shall be left to deal with the things that concern
only itself and which it can most readily deal with; so that town,
county, city, and State have their respective spheres of duty, while
the nation deals with those matters which concern all of us, all of
the people, no matter where we dwell. Our democracy is based upon
the belief that each individual ought to have the largest measure
of liberty compatible with securing the rights of other individuals,
that the average citizen, the plain man whom we meet in daily life,
is normally capable of taking care of his own affairs, and has no
desire to wrong any one else; and yet that in the interest of all there
shall be sufficient power lodged somewhere to prevent wicked people
from trampling the weak under foot for their own gain. Our constant
endeavor is to make a good working compromise whereby we shall secure
the full benefit of individual initiative and responsibility, while at
the same time recognizing that it is the function of a wise government
under modern conditions not merely to protect life and property, but
to foster the social development of the people so far as this may be
done by maintaining and promoting justice, honesty, and equal rights.
We believe in a real, not a sham, democracy. We believe in democracy
as regards political rights, as regards education, and, finally, as
regards industrial conditions. By democracy we understand securing, as
far as it is humanly possible to secure it, equality of opportunity,
equality of the conditions under which each man is to show the stuff
that is in him and to achieve the measure of success to which his own
force of mind and character entitle him. Religiously this means that
each man is to have the right, unhindered by the state, to worship his
Creator as his conscience dictates, granting freely to others the
same freedom which he asks for himself. Politically we can be said
substantially to have worked out our democratic ideals, and the same
is true, thanks to the common schools, in educational matters. But in
industry there has not as yet been the governmental growth necessary
in order to meet the tremendous changes brought about in industrial
conditions by steam and electricity. It is not in accordance with our
principles that literally despotic power should be put into the hands
of a few men in the affairs of the industrial world. Our effort must
be for a just and effective plan of action which, while scrupulously
safeguarding the rights of the men of wealth, shall yet, so far as
is humanly possible, secure under the law to all men equality of
opportunity to make a living. It is to the interest of all of us that
the man of exceptional business capacity should be amply rewarded;
and there is nothing inconsistent with this in our insistence that he
shall not be guilty of bribery or extortion, and that the rights of
the wageworker and of the man of small means, who are themselves honest
and hard working, shall be scrupulously safeguarded. The instruments
for the exercise of modern industrial power are the great corporations
which, though created by the individual States, have grown far beyond
the control of those States and transact their business throughout
large sections of the Union. These corporations, like the industrial
conditions which have called them into being, did not exist when the
Constitution was founded; but the wise forethought of the founders
provided, under the interstate commerce clause of the Constitution,
for the very emergency which has arisen, if only our people as a whole
will realize what this emergency is; for if the people thoroughly
realize it, their governmental representatives will soon realize
it also. The National Government alone has sufficiently extensive
power and jurisdiction to exercise adequate control over the great
interstate corporations. While this thorough supervision and control
by the National Government is desirable primarily in the interest of
the people, it will also, I firmly believe, be to the benefit of those
corporations themselves which desire to be honest and law-abiding. Only
thus can we put over these corporations one competent and efficient
sovereign――the Nation――able both to exact justice from them and to
secure justice for them, so that they may not be alternately pampered
and oppressed. The proposal need be dreaded only by those corporations
which do not wish to obey the law or to be controlled in just fashion,
but prefer to take their chances under the present lack of all system
and to court the chance of getting improper favors as offsetting the
chance of being blackmailed――an attitude rendered familiar in the past
by those corporations which had thriven under certain corrupt and
lawless city governments.

The first need is to exercise this Federal control in thoroughgoing
and efficient fashion over the railroads, which, because of their
peculiar position, offer the most immediate and urgent problem. The
American people abhor a vacuum, and is determined that this control
shall be exercised somewhere; it is most unwise for the railroads not
to recognize this and to submit to it as the first requisite of the
situation. When this control is exercised in some such fashion as it is
now exercised over the national banks, there will be no falling off
in business prosperity. On the contrary, the chances for the average
man to do better will be increased. Undoubtedly there will be much
less opportunity than at present for a very few individuals not of the
most scrupulous type to amass great fortunes by speculating in and
manipulating securities which are issued without any kind of control or
supervision. But there will be plenty of room left for ample legitimate
reward for business genius, while the chance for the man who is not
a business genius, but who is a good, thrifty, hard-working citizen,
will be better. I do not believe that our efforts will have anything
but a beneficial effect upon the permanent prosperity of the country;
and, as a matter of fact, even as regards any temporary effect, I
think that any trouble is due fundamentally not to the fact that the
national authorities have discovered and corrected certain abuses, but
to the fact that those abuses were there to be discovered. I think
that the excellent people who have complained of our policy as hurting
business have shown much the same spirit as the child who regards the
dentist and not the ulcerated tooth as the real source of his woe. I
am as certain as I can be of anything that the course we are pursuing
will ultimately help business; for the corrupt man of business is as
great a foe to this country as the corrupt politician. Both stand on
the same evil eminence of infamy. Against both it is necessary to war;
and if, unfortunately, in either type of warfare, a few innocent people
are hurt, the responsibility lies not with us, but with those who have
misled them to their hurt.

This is a rapidly growing nation, on a new continent, and in an era of
new, complex, and ever-shifting conditions. Often it is necessary to
devise new methods of meeting these new conditions. We must regard the
past, but we must not regard only the past. We must also think of the
future; and while we must learn by experience, we can not afford to pay
heed merely to the teachings of experience. The great preacher Channing
in his essay on “The Union” spoke with fine insight on this very point.
In commenting on the New England statesman Cabot, whom he greatly
admired, he said that nevertheless “he had too much of the wisdom of
experience; he wanted what may be called the wisdom of hope.” He then
continued in words which have a peculiar fitness for the conditions of
to-day: “We apprehend that it is possible to make experience too much
our guide. There are seasons in human affairs, of inward and outward
revolution, when new depths seem to be broken up in the soul, when
new wants are unfolded in multitudes, and a new and undefined good is
thirsted for. These are periods when the principles of experience need
to be modified, when hope and trust and instinct claim a share with
prudence in the guidance of affairs, when in truth _to dare_ is the
highest wisdom.”

These sentences should be carefully pondered by those men, often very
good men, who forget that constructive change offers the best method of
avoiding destructive change; that reform is the antidote to revolution;
and that social reform is not the precursor but the preventive of
socialism.

                            [Illustration]




 Transcriber’s Notes:

 ――Text in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).

 ――Archaic and variable spelling has been preserved.

 ――Variations in hyphenation and compound words have been preserved.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADDRESS OF PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT AT CAIRO, ILLINOIS, OCTOBER 3, 1907 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.