THE 151st FIELD ARTILLERY BRIGADE




[Illustration: MAJOR-GENERAL WM. S. MCNAIR]




  THE
  151st FIELD ARTILLERY
  BRIGADE

  BY

  RICHARD M. RUSSELL

  [Illustration]

  THE CORNHILL COMPANY

  BOSTON




  Copyright, 1919, by
  THE CORNHILL COMPANY




TO MY OLD COMRADES


If you find in the pages that follow anything to amuse or interest
you and yours, thank Mrs. William S. McNair, Major Swift, Captain
Converse and Lieutenant Clement, to whom the author is indebted for the
information herein contained.

                                                               R. M. R.

  _Boston, April 25, 1919._




THE 151st FIELD ARTILLERY BRIGADE




The 151st Field Artillery Brigade




INTRODUCTION


In writing this brief sketch of the Brigade from its inception to its
final mustering out of the service, it has not been my aim to account
in any way for all the days and nights which have elapsed during that
period. Memories fond or hateful to some of us would not be very
interesting to the rest. Looking backward from the point of view of
the Brigade as a unit, many of those days were so monotonously alike
that an attempt to account for all would lead to idle repetition. Well
I realize that every one of them stands for something important in
the career of some one man; perhaps his first tour of guard duty, or
his first ride, a close call, a bawling out, something accomplished,
something learnt. But I have not time, space nor knowledge to write
these details. If, however, by my generalities I can so picture our
life at Devens and after that this little book will recall to its
readers those things I have omitted, it will have served its purpose.




THE 151st BRIGADE




I. CAMP DEVENS


In April, 1917, the United States declared war against Germany. It was
no surprise, but what did it mean? For it is one thing to declare war
and another to wage it. We had no army and no ships and three thousand
miles of ocean lay between the Yankee and the Hun. We would of course
lend money to our allies. Would we give them our men? The answer, thank
God, was the draft law which put into being the greatest democratic
institution of our country,--the National Army.

Early in the fall of 1917, men from every walk of life, from every
corner of every state, thronged to the huge, ugly, but business-like
cantonments which had grown up, like the mushroom over night. These
men, scientifically chosen, for their physique, mentality, character
and patriotism, were as diversified in their civil life and occupations
as men can be, but they had one thing in common: ignorance of the
military. This and the single purpose that brought them there, welded
them together. If Germany scorned our declaration of war, she must have
sung another tune as she watched us prepare to wage it.

Camp Devens, Massachusetts, was the rendez-vous for New England’s
Yankees. They were the personnel of the first of the National Army
Divisions, the Seventy-Sixth.

The Divisional Artillery was to consist of the 301st, the 302nd, and
303rd regiments, Colonels Brooke, Craig and Conklin respectively
commanding. Thus it was that the 151st Field Artillery Brigade was
born, and with what promise! Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont and
Massachusetts furnished the quota, with many a generation of fighting
ancestors behind them and traditions of battles won, not only in war
but in every field of human endeavor.

Was it strange then that Major-General William S. McNair, then
Brigadier-General, shortly after he took command in December of that
year said that he felt as proud as the young mother when she sees her
first born take its first four steps?

Those early months found us awkward and nearly as helpless as the
infant to which the General referred, but men and officers alike were
using this time to advantage; both had to adapt themselves to new
ways of thinking and living, and even the language of the army was as
strange to us then as was French when we finally got to France.

It was perhaps at this time more than any other, that we had cause to
be thankful to the General, Colonels and Lieutenant Colonels for their
able and generous assistance in getting the younger officers over those
first hurdles. Let us here extend our utmost appreciation to Lieutenant
Colonels Rehkopf, Danforth and Stopford whose loss to the Brigade we
have had many an occasion to regret. But they like many others of our
best were called upon to take bigger jobs where they could be of even
greater value to the country all were now serving.

In many respects those days were the hardest of all; everything
was strange. For a time, standing in line hour after hour was an
interesting novelty and gave the ever-present jester an opportunity to
exercise his wit; so with the drills. But human beings, particularly
the Yankee variety, adapt themselves quickly to their surroundings.
Standing in line a couple of hours for a pair of shoes or a cup of soup
ceases eventually to be an interesting novelty. And when the soup so
acquired is knocked from your hand by an over zealous companion and
soils the uniform you must keep clean, you may perhaps forgive him
and laugh; but all that is funny therein is almost sure to occur to
your fertile mind and keen sense of humor the first time it happens.
Repetition is superfluous.

Being herded together, seeing the same man on either side of you every
day and all day, having to do what you are told day and night, has
but limited charms for the independent citizen of America. Thoughts
were turned, first backward, to the days when we had been individuals
instead of a mite of a cog in a great machine, and then forward, with
the inevitable question: how long was it all to last? We would have
been homesick, desperately so, but there was no time. A bugle broke our
sleep when it was still dark. Another summoned us to a formation before
it was physically possible to get dressed, from which we were marched
to breakfast. A whistle, followed by the First Sergeant’s “Fall Out”,
arrested the first mouthful and told us we would not have time to wash
mess kits before policing. Policing was followed by inspection, where
the Captain would bawl us out for the condition of those same wretched
mess kits. Inspection was followed by physical exercises; physical
exercises by foot drill, foot drill by a hike, the hike by mess. In the
afternoon we rehearsed the events of the morning. Supper was followed
by school, then taps, then bed, then reveille. To-day is a repetition
of yesterday, to-morrow will be a repetition of to-day. But to-day we
are not going to be bawled out for dirty mess kits, we wash them and
are late for policing; the First Sergeant puts us in the kitchen for
a week and we learn the meaning of K. P.[A] We are soon repentant and
resolve to be on time to formation. This is the school of the Rookie
and this is how he learns the impossible. “Take therefore no thought
for the morrow, for the morrow shall take thought for the things of
itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.”

The next quota of men come into camp; we have graduated; they are the
rookies; we are the soldiers; we laugh; they look puzzled.

Then came the winter, and what a winter! Arthur Mometer said it was
zero hour all the time. Of course he did not know. He was a Rookie,
but somehow it didn’t make it any warmer nor the snow less deep. We
shovelled snow and froze doing it, we had exercises and we froze doing
that, we drilled with the same result. Live horses took the place of
those ever-to-be-remembered wooden monstrosities. We groomed them and
they bit us. We exercised them and they kicked us. But we got hard and
we got health and we became soldiers. Individuality was superseded by
discipline.

About this time a touch of war and Hun Hellishness was brought home to
us. William S. McNair, Colonel of the 6th Field Artillery was promoted
in France and ordered to America to command our Brigade. Accordingly he
left France on the U. S. S. “Antilles”. At about 6.45 in the morning
of October 17th a German submarine succeeded in torpedoing his boat.
She sank immediately with the loss of about 65 lives. The General
was in the water for some three quarters of an hour, when he was
taken into a life boat. Six hours later one of the convoy, the Morgan
yacht “Corsair” returned from trying to find the submarine and took
aboard all the survivors. They returned to France and two weeks later
the General again sailed for home on the transport “Tenadores”. The
“Tenadores” has since been sunk by a mine, but happily for the Brigade
it was not on this voyage.

Christmas came and with it the joy of home for a few, but the majority
of the men must stay in camp. It was all part of the great task we had
undertaken. We accepted it as such. Transportation was not available to
move our now vast army to its homes. We made merry, or rather, we did
better than that; we pretended to make merry. We sang the songs we had
rehearsed for the occasion. It was a holiday. There were no drills. We
had time to think. We can be honest now. Our thoughts were not those of
the schoolboy on his holiday with his plans for stockings and Christmas
tree, dinner and stomach ache. They were far-away thoughts of things,
once commonplace and taken for granted, now suddenly and forever dearer
than life itself; things which in fact made life worth while. Home,
loved, of course, but so much a part of us that we had grown to accept
it as a matter of right. But strangely enough our thoughts carried
us farther. We found that we were longing for the little individual
problems of our daily routine in the past,--problems that had once
perplexed and annoyed us we now craved as a hungry man craves food.

Months slipped by, and with them the winter. Spring rumors of France
took the place of winter rumors, but the warm weather and a few guns
found us ready for the real work of artillerymen. Reveille was an hour
earlier and retreat an hour later. But we were up hours before reveille
with a call to stables followed by boots and saddles. We hitched the
horses to the guns in the darkness, that we might get all the daylight
on the range. A runaway was not an unusual diversion. But as we had
become fit, so did the horses. Every day saw men and horses in better
condition and better trained. Team work and order was taking the place
of individual endeavor and chaos. A machine with intelligence was in
the making, and results were beginning to assert themselves. Each cog
was finding its place and taking hold with a will. A sharp command in
the crisp air put the works instantly in motion, where a month before
explanations, demonstrations, repeated attempts and failures had only
succeeded in getting parts of our engine to function. Now the gears
were adjusted, we needed but to limber them up and oil the parts. An
occasional “Well Done” would take the place of continuous reprimand.
We became proud of ourselves and our organization. A healthy spirit
of rivalry stalked abroad. We were the _best_ section in the _best_
battery, and of course our regiment was the _best_ in the Brigade, if
not in the army! Officers were proud of their men, and the men were
proud of the officers. Each began to know the other, his powers and his
limitations. Sympathy took the place of misunderstanding and surliness.

[Illustration: COLONEL GEO. M. BROOKE]

So on the range, the officers acquired the theoretical elements of
artillery firing. They learnt to figure their data with accuracy and
to convey it to their batteries in terse and comprehensive commands.
The men in their turn were seeing the purpose of the monotonous daily
drills of the six months past and the value of team work. They acquired
an intimate knowledge of the pieces they were serving; the delicacy
of the mechanism and the consequent necessity for accurate laying. They
responded with alacrity to the orders of their superiors, and the guns
responded to the slightest touch of the crews. All were alert, smart,
prompt,--officers and men alike, fascinated with the possibilities of
the game they were rapidly learning to play. Even the details, after
months of labor, became proficient at the wig wag, semaphore, buzzer,
map-making and sketching; in short, all of those things which we
discovered later, played such an important part in winning the war.

So when the government inspectors began to look us over and rumors flew
faster, we were not found wanting. The wheels were oiled and the spirit
was there.

But here I am rudely stopped by the adjutant of the 301st who says
we can’t leave Devens without a Horse Show. Of course he is right.
It can’t be done, although it does seem tough after having oiled the
wheels to such perfection. However what must be done shall be done
gracefully; so thought Captain Page at the second hurdle where he
decided to make the rest of the trip on his ear.

And the horses, too, grasped the spirit. Like many people they enjoyed
the show from without the ring better than within it. Some came on the
scene with dignity, only to bolt the next minute, not to reappear. Some
merely confounded their riders by refusing jumps, while others were
unmannered enough to refuse to show. For all that, it was a Horse Show
and one of which to be proud.

Since ceremonies are in order, let us not forget the prayer which took
place one memorable day on the Parade Ground with the entire Division
drawn up for the occasion. Here a horse also figured,--the Division
Adjutant’s. As the parson began to pray, the horse started to jump and
those who were nearest insisted that the adjutant outdid the parson. I
will not say, for I could hear the adjutant and I could not hear the
parson. This was the last time the Division was together as a unit.

One day toward the end of June a long train was spotted in the
quartermaster yards. Trucks were soon busy carrying officers, men and
their baggage in that direction. Of course, nobody knew that an advance
party of some hundred officers and three hundred men had been secretly
ordered to report to the Commanding General, Port of Embarkation, New
York, for transportation overseas. On June 27th they sailed on the
British liner “Justicia”, which was sunk on her return trip. But the
American soldier is no fool. He has learnt to keep his eyes open and
his mouth shut, to believe about half he sees and nothing he hears. He
was more sure now that the Division was about to sail for France than
if he had read it in every newspaper in the United States.

In another two weeks rumors were forgotten. On July 10th the Division
was ordered overseas. This was fact. The air was charged with
excitement, which however found its expression in orderly and untiring
hustle and bustle. Men, animals and transportation were all worked
overtime, but even balky army trucks seemed to go for once with a will.
The labors of the last ten months were not to be in vain. We were to
have a chance to practise what we had learnt and perhaps to show the
Hun a few tricks of his own game.

The Artillery were the last to leave. It was not a difficult task.
We were to receive our materiel in France. Individual equipment only
was to accompany the troops, for we had nothing else. The few guns we
drilled with were out of date and not used abroad. The 302nd, and 303rd
regiments were already motorized on paper, so horses were no longer
needed for them, but the 301st must have shed bitter tears for the
beautiful animals they had spent so much time and energy to condition
and train.

Twenty-eight lieutenants of the 302nd left ahead of their regiment and
sailed from Boston on the “Katoomba” which touched at Halifax on its
way to Liverpool.




II. OVERSEAS


Of that last journey from Devens to Boston on July 15th there is
nothing to chronicle. We were again for that brief period of time
individuals. Thought and not action crowded the hour. And what a
curious collection of thoughts they were. Each was absorbed with the
things nearest and dearest, soon to be far away. But there were other,
exciting thoughts. We were on our way! What boats were to carry us? The
sea! What were we going to accomplish? And that far-away France,--what
was it like? And war, what was it like? Would we come back?

The train stopped. “Fall out”. There was a scramble for one’s
possessions, followed by another for our places on the platform. We
were marched on board and to our bunks, where we left our belongings
and hastened on deck. All was again hustle and excitement. The gang
planks were lowered, the hawsers dropped. The whistles were blowing and
we were off for France,--off for the war, July 16th, 1918.

Our boat was the “Winifredian”. Soon we were absorbed in our
surroundings. There were twenty-three ships in our convoy, curious
in their camouflage, but then all was strange to most of us, who
were not used to ocean liners. And the harbor had its fascinations.
Comparatively speaking we were men of leisure. Jest once more asserted
itself. Our quarters while not altogether to our taste, like most other
things in the army would have to do, since there was no alternative. We
turned in and strangely enough we slept.

Then sounded that good old familiar bugle with the good old familiar:

  “_We can’t get ’em up,
  We can’t get ’em up,
  We can’t get ’em up in the morning;
  We can’t get ’em up,
  We can’t get ’em up,
  We can’t get ’em up at all._”

Where were we? Oh yes! On our way to France. We dressed hurriedly and
got up on deck. The convoy was still there but not all of it. Four
ships had disappeared and various theories were propounded. But just
as the official dopster had got them well sunk by a submarine and
was counting the casualties, it was announced that they had put into
Halifax. Apparently the convoy was too large and unwieldy, so four
boats had to drop out, one of which was the “Novara” with the 301st on
board. However the other two regiments were still in the convoy and we
proceeded on our way. We had boat drill and we wore life preservers,
and we got rather bored with both. As for guard duty and setting up
exercises they bored us eight months before. Seasickness is preferable
to either, and there were a good many of us sick.

While we were sailing merrily across the North Atlantic, the 301st had
disembarked at Halifax and was playing with the Canadian troops there
and thereabouts. But it was only for a week, when they were again on
their way, this time on the “Abinsi”.

As the 301st left Canada, the other two regiments landed in England,
one at Liverpool, another at Bristol, and Brigade Headquarters at
Avonmouth on July 31st.

The next novelty was the English railway carriage or coach, as they
call it. It was the latest model limousine with side entrances
and compartments. We tried them and landed at Camp Mornhill near
Winchester, where we found the twenty-eight officers of the 302nd who
had sailed from Boston just ahead of us. A week later the 301st came
to Winchester, but they had become somewhat exclusive in Canada and so
on August eighth they went to Romsey instead of our camp. Winchester
apparently produces a good deal of mud and a lot of rain. At any rate
it was not sufficiently alluring to detain us for long. We proceeded to
Southampton. “I say does it always rain here?” But before our British
friend got around to answering us we were again on the move,--this time
to a Channel steamer, and France. So we were really going to France and
the war, and not for a tour of the world.

On August 3rd the steamer that took Brigade Headquarters and the 303rd
across the English Channel, or La Manche as the French call it, was
one of our own,--and hence, a good boat. She used to run between Boston
and New York, and her name used to be “The Yale”. Than which there is
but one better: “The Harvard”. The 302nd crossed on her the next day.

The 301st was still about a week behind the rest of the Brigade. They
sailed from Southampton on August 14th and also landed at Le Havre.

“So this is Frogland! Look at the frogs,--wooden shoes and all! Even
the little children speak French here.” But they did not give us time
to get acquainted. Again we were off, this time on a French train.
They have them like the British, but this one looked like the variety
we used to play with as kids, only each car says on the outside “40
Hommes, 8 Chevaux.” We knew not what it meant but the stench was
indicative.

Two days got us to Bordeaux. We arrived on August 6th and Brigade
Headquarters was established on August 7th at Gradignan in a very
attractive villa with beautiful grounds. The 301st also established
Headquarters at Gradignan, on August 17th, and billeted their men in
the village. You will notice that here they were more than a week
behind us. They account for this by an aeroplane attack at Rouen. The
302nd was billeted in two little villages, Ville Nave and Pont de la
Maye, a few kilometres from Brigade Headquarters. The 301st Ammunition
Train was at Cadaujac.

We seemed doomed to lose a regiment. At Havre the 303rd was ordered to
Clermont Ferrand for its training.

While the regiments were en route from the United States to France,
the Advance Schools Detachment of the Brigade were wandering over
Europe. From Liverpool they went to Southampton and Le Havre, then to
Le Valdahon near the Swiss border. There they spent a couple of weeks
and saw some American artillery training and a few Hun planes. From Le
Valdahon the contingent from the 303rd went to Clermont and those of
the other two regiments went to Souge, near Bordeaux.

It was about this time that we were informed that we were no longer a
part of the 76th Division, but were to be a Brigade of Corps Artillery.
It did not cause many tears as the 76th was already doing duty as a
replacement division with no chance of going to the front as a unit.
Our tables of organization were changed accordingly and we were rapidly
equipped for duty in our new capacity. The 303rd regiment was issued
G. P. F.s, the famous French 155 m. m. long rifle with a range of about
17,000 metres. The 301st got the world renowned French 75, the best
known gun of the war, and the 302nd got American 4.7 rifles about which
nothing was known.

While in Gradignan and vicinity our days consisted largely in getting
acquainted with our new guns. We also learnt French and paraded. Some
of our number were detailed to join the Advanced Schools Detachment at
Camp de Souge, August 14th.

On August 25th the London Evening Mail published the news of General
NcNair’s promotion. We were of course glad of the obviously merited
reward, but selfishly would rather have had it otherwise, for of course
he would cease to be our Brigade commander. However, at the time we
consoled ourselves with the thought that he might command the Corps
artillery of which we would be a part. That night there was a dinner
and celebration at Brigade Headquarters. The scene was picturesque
and one to be remembered. The French Mayors of the villages where our
troops were billeted were invited and came. The meal was served on the
lawn under a huge tree in those beautiful gardens. A hundred yards down
the lawn through the trees we could see the 301st band, conducted by
Lieutenant Keller. They played as even they had never played before.
The villagers, hearing the music, flocked to the gates and the General
sent word to the guard that the sentries were to let them in. In they
came and went straight to the music. Sitting on the lawn they made a
huge circle around the band, and gave our Headquarters a very festive
appearance. It was a rare occasion for them. Lovers of music that they
were, it was seldom that they had an opportunity to hear it. Their own
bands had long been busy nearer the front.

On September 5th and 8th the two regiments, 302nd and 301st
respectively, moved to Souge for the final six weeks firing before
going to the front. We made the trip, some twenty miles, with our own
transportation. Brigade Headquarters was established at the camp on
September 8th and the Ammunition Train moved in the same day.

Souge is located in the middle of a sand desert at the end of the
world. As far as you can see there is not a landmark to relieve the
monotony. It is as flat as a table all the way to the sea, some
twenty-five miles distant. As Major Hadley of the 301st remarked: “It
is a nice beach but where is the water?” Souge may best be described
as follows,--a camp some two miles long of ramshackle, broken down,
foul smelling barracks in the middle of the desert which was to be our
range. Flies, sand, dust and heat were in abundance, as were dysentery
and the “Flu” at times. The flies were like ours except larger, more
abundant and infinitely more obnoxious. As one of our men wrote home,
he was in the hospital as a result of having been kicked by a fly.

  _Of all the camps in the A. E. F.
  Whether S. O. S. or zone of Advance,
  You will cuss until you’re out of breath
  This Camp de Souge in France._

But there we were. We ate the dust, we killed flies and we sweat in the
sweltering heat, as we pulled guns, trucks and tractors through that
damnable sand.

On September 21st the long dreaded orders for Major-General McNair
arrived and with them Secretary of War Baker, General Tasker Bliss and
a flock of Major Generals and Brigadiers. That same day he relinquished
the command to Brigadier-General Richmond P. Davis and left camp to
take command of the Artillery of the First Army.

The finishing touches were applied. We were inspected. We passed our
examinations and were ready for the front. When would the orders come?
There were already rumors of peace,--were we to miss the party after
a year and a half of preparation? The thought was nauseating, but we
stuck to our work. We knew our Brigade Commander was a hustler. We
could see it, and General McNair had said so. Confidence ran high.

We had an abundance of ammunition and General Davis ordered a problem
to cover three days. The guns were to go into position at night and
without lights; they did. We established communication by telephone,
radio and projector, and maintained it. Conversation was in code and
cypher. We were to fire an offensive barrage over the infantry; it was
done. The infantry called for a defensive barrage at 11.40 at night; it
was layed before the rocket burst.

Altogether in this problem of four regiments the 75s fired about 6,000
rounds and the 4.7s about 600.[B]

In the meantime it rained, or rather poured. The heavens were trying to
make good for the past six months of inaction,--they did. Or perhaps
it was the 302nd weeping for the now certain loss of Colonel Craig. He
had received his promotion and it was only a question of time before
his orders would arrive. Loved and respected by all who knew him, he
was to leave a vacancy hard to fill. His officers gave him a dinner in
Bordeaux on October 7th.




III. THE FRONT


It was while our problem was in progress that General Davis and part
of his staff left for the front, October 11th. A few days later,
on October 17th, he was followed by the rest of his staff. So the
regiments polished and oiled their materiel and entrained at the camp
for God-knows-where. One thing was certain and that was we were going
forward and not back, for from Bordeaux it takes a boat to go in the
latter direction. It was at this time that we knew definitely that
the 301st was to leave the Brigade. It was to be army artillery and
received different orders, confirming our fears when it was detached by
telegraphic order of October 2nd.

Hardly had the General with a few members of his staff arrived at the
front when a stray shell killed his aide, Lieutenant W. B. Dixon, Jr.,
October 19th, 1918. He was buried with military honors where he fell
near Bouillonville. He had been with us but a few days, but such was
his personality and charm that he had become as closely identified with
the Brigade as the oldest member of the staff. His death was a personal
loss to every one of us.

Brigade Headquarters was established at St. Mihiel, Meuse, October
19th, 1918, and the entries in the official War Diary begin. I have
the diary before me as I write, and I feel that I cannot do better
than take the information therein practically word for word as it was
recorded each day from October 19th to November 11th.

The famous salient of St. Mihiel had been wiped out a month before.
Having held it successfully for four long years, the Germans considered
their lines there impenetrable; but it took the Yankees just two
short days, September 12th and 13th to reduce that four years’ work
to nothing, and on our side of the balance sheet now stood several
thousand prisoners and a few hundred guns. It had happened a month
before, but the battle fields were still fresh with Hun relics and
ruins, and one had but to see to know that Heine and Fritz had lost no
time in their departure. Everywhere ammunition dumps and other stores
were left untouched by the fleeing foe.

October 19th the 151st Field Artillery Brigade, less one regiment (the
301st) was attached to the 2nd Colonial Corps (French) of the Second
Army, A. E. F., as corps artillery, with its rail head at Sorcy and
its Refilling Point at Woinville. The zones and mission of the Brigade
were assigned. In a general way our sector extended from Bonzee to
Vigneulles. The line in this sector ran roughly northwest to southeast,
the Germans holding the villages of Ville en Woevre, Pintheville,
Riaville, Marcheville, St. Hilaire, Doncourt and Woel.

October 21st was devoted to reconnaissance. The commanding officer,
Colonel Conklin of the 303rd F. A. and staff arrived. An air raid by
the enemy occurred at 7.00 p. m. They are all alike. This is what
happens. Delicate instruments more sensitive than the human ear detect
the sound of the aeroplane’s engines at a great distance. These
instruments are placed at intervals along the lines at what are known
as listening posts or stations. Directly an enemy plane is detected,
its whereabouts and direction are telephoned to the areas behind.
There, the fact is announced by a bugle call, followed by rattles,
sirens and every other variety of music. This is the first you know
of the “ships that pass in the night.” There is a scramble for the
nearest abri, otherwise known as bomb-proof or dug-out. You stumble
and fall down a flight of steps and find yourself from twenty to forty
feet below ground. It is dark, and the air is damp and smells vilely.
There are from fifty to a hundred other humans in this subterranean
tomb, some lie down, prepared to spend the night, others, half-clad,
shiver and wait. Then out of the distance you hear a faint humming as
of insects in summer. It grows louder. It is the engines of the enemy’s
planes. Suddenly Hell is torn loose. The anti-aircraft guns or Archies,
as the British call them, have opened fire from the ground. The planes
return the compliment with bombs and machine guns. A boiler factory in
your head would not be nearly so bad for your ears as the cracking and
shrieking that takes place. As suddenly as it started it ceases. All
is quiet. We go about our duties or sleep, as the case may be, until
the next raid occurs. If it is a clear night and the planes are likely
to return, there are many who prefer to stay in the dug-out and make a
night of it there rather than spend the time until morning running back
and forth.

October 22nd the work of reconnaissance for battery positions and P.
C.s[C] continued. More enemy planes were seen over St. Mihiel. But this
time it was broad daylight; they reconnoitered and took photographs,
but there was no battle royal to disturb the peace. Suddenly little
balls of cotton appeared about the plane. They were the bursts of some
distant anti-aircraft battery trying to annoy the aviator.

October 23rd the commanding officer (Colonel Platt) of the 302nd
F. A. and staff arrived. In the afternoon enemy airplanes made a
reconnaissance. The regimental advanced parties arrived.

Reconnaissance was the chief work of the next few days. Lieutenant
Colonel McCabe of the 302nd taking the area to the north of Bonzee. The
Germans must have had the same idea, for enemy aircraft continued to
pass over Headquarters.

On October 28th the 33rd Division relieved the 79th Division in this
sector, the 55th Field Artillery Brigade remaining in place, with its
Headquarters at Troyon (P. C. Kilbreith).

[Illustration: BRIGADIER-GENERAL DANIEL F. CRAIG]

By November 1st all the battery positions and P. C.s were located and
billets were obtained for the regiments. Colonel Platt of the 302nd
F. A. chose some old German shelters near the one-time village of St.
Remy for his P. C. His batteries were to be scattered through the Bois
des Eparges, mostly to the north. The 3rd Battalion was to be behind
the hills to the eastward. The country looked like pictures of the
moon sometimes reproduced in scientific magazines because of interest
but never on account of beauty. Once there had been woods; now there
was hardly a tree standing. All vegetation had been killed by gas
and shell,--crater after crater gave mother earth a very diseased
appearance. Here we spent our days and nights while the war lasted.
Colonel Platt chose Rupt for his billets.

Colonel Conklin in selecting his P. C. showed better taste. He found
an old German Headquarters, built like a Swiss chalet in the heart of
the woods and far away from harm. Here he settled comfortably, two
kilometres to the northeast of Deuxnouds and just South of the Grande
Tranchee de Calonne. He had but two battalions. The first he placed to
the east of his P. C., the second about four kilometres to the north.

This same day liaison was established with S. R. S. No. 3 American, and
on November 2nd with S. R. O. T. Nos. 58 and 67.

November 3rd the Brigade Headquarters detachment arrived and was
billeted in St. Mihiel, and information was received that the 302nd
F. A. had detrained at Dugny and was moving into Rupt en Woevre.

November 4th information was received that the 303rd F. A. had
detrained at Dugny and was moving into Creue. The 3rd Battalion of the
303rd was assigned to the Fourth Army Corps.

November 5th the Second Battalion of the 302nd reported its guns in
position and ready to open fire. Hardly was this accomplished when
the Huns began to give them a taste of gas, over 3,000 rounds being
reported. One gun of Battery B, 303 F. A. was reported to be in
position. The Brigade was detached from the 2nd C. A. C. (French), and
was put under the command of the 17th C. A. (French).

November 6th one gun of the 303rd F. A. was ready to fire at midnight
and the other guns were being moved up as fast as the positions were
constructed.

From 10.00 p. m. November 6th to 2.00 p. m. November 7th, about 3,000
gas shells, mostly mustard, fell near B and F Batteries of the 302nd
F. A., but though other artillery units nearby had a number of men
gassed, the 302nd F. A. had no casualties, thanks to strict and
effectual gas discipline.

In the vicinity of P. C. Gross, Second Battalion of the 303d, about two
hundred gas and high explosive shells fell, also without casualties.

In the afternoon Field Order No. 1 was issued directing the 302nd to
deliver harassing fire during the night on Ville en Woevre and on the
roads from that place to Braquis and Hennemont. The 303rd F. A. was to
fire on Hennemont, Pareid, Maizeray and Moulotte. At 6.10 the orders
were changed by telephone on account of later information, with the
result that the 302nd F. A. took under fire two additional targets,
which were identified only by their coordinates. The 303rd fired at
Pareid and Moulotte and on a battery in the Bois de Harville.

On the night of November 6th and 7th, in a two company infantry raid
with artillery support against the Chateau d’Ardnois, one German
officer and twenty-two men were captured and from ten to fourteen
killed. Our own casualties were slight. There was very little enemy
artillery fire during the day. At 9.15 however, on the night of
November 7th, the operations officer of the 55th Field Artillery
Brigade at P. C. Kilbreith reported heavy shelling by the enemy of
Fresnes en Woevre. This village was now strongly held by our troops,
and it was thought that the German fire was in retaliation for the
raid. Our Sound Ranging Section S. R. S. No. 3 had located the
enemy batteries that were executing the fire and we were asked for
neutralization at the earliest possible moment. This order was sent
to the 303rd F. A. by courier and telephone. At 11.00 a. m. the enemy
having ceased his fire, the 303rd F. A. was ordered to discontinue
firing. Field Order No. 2 was then issued authorizing the 303rd F. A.
to fire at once for neutralization upon any enemy battery reported in
action beyond Maizeray. In the meantime Major Hadley’s Battalion of
the 302nd F. A. was fired upon by the enemy with gas shells. Captain
Lefferts was the only casualty.

On November 8th two strong patrols of our infantry, sent early in the
morning to the Bois de Harville and St. Hilaire, brought back three
prisoners. The 33rd Division reported considerable harassing fire about
Les Eparges and Saulx en Woevre, with some interdiction fire on the
villages at the base of the hills. The total was about 3,000 rounds.
This was the first day that the air was clear enough for the G. P. F.s
to register, and Colonel Conklin registered on Joinville. Shortly
after 4.00 o’clock, Balloon No. 22 reported two batteries firing. They
were given to the 303rd F. A. for immediate neutralization. In the
meantime, orders had been sent out for the night’s firing, the targets
assigned to the 303rd F. A. being two batteries of 105 howitzers in
the Bois de Harville and the towns Maizeray and Butgneville. The 302nd
F. A. was given the Pintheville-Maizeray road, the Pintheville-Pareid
road, Maizeray, Butgneville and St. Hilaire, the latter being the most
important. The fire was to stop at 3.00 a. m. to permit an infantry
raid to go into St. Hilaire and the vicinity. These orders, sent by
telephone and courier, were in response to a request for help from
the Divisional Artillery. They were followed by a Memorandum to the
regiments designating the zones in which, after the start of the
infantry raid on November 9th, it would not be safe for them to fire
without express authority.

On November 9th a change of organization occurred as a result of the
removal of a large part of the French Artillery from the sector.
The two batteries which were left,--one of 120 long and one of 155
long,--were taken over by General Davis and assigned to the command
of Colonel Platt of the 302nd F. A. in what then became known as the
Groupment Platt. General Davis thus became Commander of the Corps
Artillery of the sector.

Early in the morning of this same day, a request was received from the
infantry through the Operations Officer of the 55th Field Artillery
Brigade for help in a raid. It appeared that lack of ammunition for
the Divisional artillery threatened to deprive the infantry of much
needed artillery assistance. Orders were issued for concentration fire
between 2.00 and 5.00 a. m. on Maizeray, Butgneville and St. Hilaire
and between 5.00 and 6.45 a. m. on Maizeray and Butgneville. With the
approval of Corps Artillery Headquarters the regiments were permitted
to use ammunition beyond that authorized for daily expenditure.

The strong reconnoitering patrols sent out by the 33rd Division
executed the raid on Marcheville. It was completely successful and
resulted in the capture of eighty prisoners including three officers.
Patrols near Pintheville and Riaville met strong resistance. At 3.50 p. m.
an enemy barrage of about 4,000 shells was laid down between Fresnes
and Wadonville, probably in retaliation for the raid of the previous
night. Orders were issued that the regiments should fire at once on any
batteries reported in action by the Sound Ranging Section (S. R. S. No.
3) and that every clear day should be utilized for registration. During
the afternoon the 303rd F. A. was directed to fire on two batteries
of 210 howitzers,--one near Labouville and the others northeast of
Joinville,--and on a battery of medium calibre, just south of Moulotte.

Late in the afternoon we were informed that an infantry raid would
take place at H hour next morning on our front. The Groupment Platt
were ordered to fire on Maizeray and on the road between Pintheville
and Maizeray. The 303rd was to fire on Maizeray, Harville and the same
stretch of road and on batteries reported firing from points back of
Maizeray. The fire of both groups was to last for 105 minutes after H
hour and at 2.20 in the morning, notification was sent by courier to
the commanding officers of the two regiments that H hour would be
5.45 a. m.

At 8.30 in the evening the General ordered a concentration by the 302nd
F. A. on Riaville, Pintheville and the road connecting them, to be
fired between midnight and 3 a. m. At 8.45, the 303rd F. A. was given
counter-battery work in answer to a call from the Divisional Artillery
Headquarters.

Upon the change in organization mentioned above, the advanced location
for our Brigade P. C. was fixed at Creue. The regiments were ordered
to reconnoitre to find locations for at least some of their guns out
on the Plain of Woevre where they would be able to reach some of the
German long range artillery which had been bothering us, and also
follow up the advance of our infantry for a long distance without
changing position for a second time.

On November 10th a general advance was ordered to begin at 7.00 a. m.
but the order did not reach our Brigade. However, this information
was obtained incidentally by the Brigade Commander, and at 10.40 a. m.
orders were issued for the regiments to provide advance telephone
lines, with a view to establishing forward P. C.s. At the same time
the Brigade P. C. was opened at Creue. A series of orders were issued
over the telephone with reference to a change of positions by the 302nd
F. A. and the 303rd F. A. and at 11.48 we received orders from the
corps that the 4.7 regiment must advance as soon as possible. Orders
were sent to them to complete all reconnaissance and prepare to move
immediately. At 1.25 orders were received from the corps to move two
batteries of the 303rd F. A. with 400 rounds of ammunition at the tail
of the main body of the 33rd Division in advance. It was thought that
this was based on the supposition that the enemy was going to retire,
which he had no intention of doing, as later developments showed.

At 4.00 o’clock in the afternoon, word having been received that the
country to the north and east of Bonzee was occupied by the enemy, an
officer was sent to the 33rd Division occupying our sector and another
to the 81st Division on our left to find out the true state of affairs.
There proved to be no basis whatever for this report, as the 33rd
Division was holding its forward line in great strength with a view to
attacking on the morning of the 11th, and the 81st Division was also
reinforced for a continuation of their attack, begun on the 10th.

General Bailey, commanding the 81st Division and Colonel Roberts, Chief
of Staff, urgently requested artillery help in their attack on Ville en
Woevre, Hennemont and other points. The Brigade supported these attacks
between 5.00 and 7.00.

The commanding General of the 33rd Division, having received orders to
advance, called for support from the Corps Artillery on Pintheville,
Harville, Moulotte, Maizeray, Pareid and batteries in the Bois de
Harville and elsewhere. This support was given between 9.25 p. m.
November 10th and 5.00 a. m. November 11th.

At 7.30 p. m. the 302nd F. A. was ordered to move one battalion into
the advanced positions in the Plain of the Woevre and to have another
battalion in motion so as to reach its advanced position on the 11th
while the guns held in reserve were to continue the firing. One
battalion, in accordance with these instructions, took position on the
Plain of the Woevre near Tresauvaux, well in advance of the main body
of the infantry and of the resistance line. It remained there overnight
and until ordered to withdraw on the morning of the 11th, when news was
received that the armistice had been signed.

In the meantime, three guns of the 303rd F. A. were successfully moved
into similar forward positions from which, if fighting had continued,
they might have done highly effective work against some of the distance
long range German guns, especially those that had been bothering St.
Maurice, Thillot and other towns along the base of the hills. The
Brigade fired 736 rounds in the course of the day, against a number of
different targets assigned from time to time by Brigade Headquarters,
or reported direct to the regiments by the S. R. S.

At about ten o’clock on the night of the 10th the French corps
commander under whom we were serving, said he expected important
news from the Eiffel Tower wireless station before morning. He asked
Brigade Headquarters to notify him should our wireless pick up anything
of interest. Taking the daily communiques from the Eiffel Tower had
been part of our routine work, so the operators knew her[D] voice
intimately. Accordingly they were not unduly surprised when she started
her familiar squeak early on that historic morning. Received at 5.45
a. m. November 11th, the message that the armistice had been signed
and that hostilities were to cease at 11.00 a. m. was reported at the
Brigade P. C., Creue, by telephone from the St. Mihiel Headquarters. To
the credit of the Brigade let it be known that it was from our station
that the news was given to the entire sector.

The 33rd Division attacked at 5.00 a. m. Strong patrols sent out along
the front captured three officers and eighty-three men. Infantry lines
were established at the close of hostilities as follows: Chateau
d’Aulnois, Riaville, Marcheville, St. Hilaire, south of Butgneville,
Bois de Harville thence southward to Ferma d’Hautes Journeux. These
towns were taken on the morning of the 11th. It was a glorious piece
of work but hardly worth the price in American life it involved. The
Germans, pushed to the limit, made a last stubborn resistance and from
behind their fortifications and barbed wire delivered a murderous fire
on our troops with rear guard machine gun action from hidden nests. The
battlefield as I saw it that afternoon, I shall not soon forget. There
lay an American sergeant, where he had fallen, and behind him lay his
men, not twenty yards from the German machine gun they were attacking.
My thoughts were first of sorrow that these men should have made the
supreme sacrifice in those last minutes of the great war. In those
fine young faces still shone the joy of life, theirs but yesterday,
when they had thought of home and all it held in store. But I read
another story, that of peace, such as is only experienced after a hard
struggle won and as I looked at the scene I felt a thrill of pride.
What a sacrifice! but God, how gloriously made!

The plans for the early morning attack contemplated prearranged firing
by the Corps Artillery until 7.00 a. m. Information that the Armistice
had been signed having arrived at 5.45 a. m., the Heavy Artillery
Commander at that hour ordered no more firing, unless urgently called
for by some infantry unit which was in need of help or was being
effectively shelled. The advance Brigade P. C. at Creue was closed at
11.00 a. m. Ammunition had been brought up during the night and the
corps artillery stood ready with some of its guns advanced beyond the
main line of resistance, to support fully a further general infantry
attack.

At 10.55 on the morning of the Armistice, the 303rd Band at Creue
played taps, then the Marseillaise, then the Star Spangled Banner and
then Reveille. All that morning the artillery thundered and was still
thundering when the music started. When it stopped, all was still.

On the afternoon of November 12th I walked along our front between the
lines. The stillness of peace was upon the earth where but yesterday
the din of bloody battle reigned. Our lines were held by a series of
sentries walking their posts as if on parade. Over yonder the Germans
were doing likewise. The sun shone in gladness upon the scene. The air
was crisp and the reliefs were gathering wood for their fires. As the
shadows grew longer and the sun set in a blaze of glory, the figures
of the sentries grew dim, but their positions became identified by the
bonfires they had kindled which now alone marked the lines. As I turned
to go, rockets once used to call for a barrage or as a warning of gas
lit the sky. Thus ended the war.




SUMMARY


A resume of the history of the 151st Field Artillery Brigade during
its short term at the front shows a great variety of services and
connections.

Originally constituting a part of the Artillery of the Second Army,
the Brigade was attached on its arrival in the zone of advance to the
Second Colonial Corps of the French army in the Troyon sector, where
it served under General Blondlat, Corps commander and General Jaquet,
Chief of Artillery.

The Second Colonial Corps was relieved by the 17th French Corps,
General Hellot commanding, General Walch, Chief of Artillery. On
October 29th, the Brigade came under their command.

On November 13th the Brigade was assigned to the Fourth American Corps.
When the Fourth Corps moved forward at 5.00 a. m., November 17th, the
Brigade passed into the Second Army Reserve. When the regiments first
came into the St. Mihiel sector, the infantry holding it were the 79th
Division of the American Army, General Joseph E. Kuhn commanding;
the 39th French Infantry Division and the 28th French Regiment of
Dismounted Cavalry. On the 28th of October, however, the 79th was
relieved by the 33rd American Division, General George Bell commanding.

The 39th French Infantry Division and the 28th regiment of Dismounted
Cavalry were withdrawn and the sector of the 17th Corps was from
Vigneulles to Bonzee.

The Corps Artillery, 151st Brigade and two batteries of French
Artillery à Pied, covered the entire front of fifteen kilometres.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is the story of our few days at the front before the Armistice,
and this is what we did in the actual fighting.

I have been obliged for lack of space and knowledge to omit those
things most interesting to the individual--little incidentals, perhaps
from the point of view of the rest of us, but to him they constituted
the war, and always will. For this reason they will remain forever
vivid pictures in his memory and are therefore not necessary to
chronicle. At the same time it will do no harm to recall a few more
facts and feelings that all in one way or another experienced during
that momentous although brief period of our lives. Mud is perhaps the
foremost to the author. But there were others. At night there was not
a light as we stumbled and cursed, feeling our way in those ruined
villages; automobiles and trucks travelled similarly without lights in
the jet blackness, sometimes on the road but more often off it. And
the drivers, let us not forget them and their troubles: the sinking
feeling in the region of the stomach as the truck, laden to its limit
with ammunition, would itself first sink and then stick in that sea of
mud. Tired to the point of exhaustion, they would dig for hours and
get out only to be in again a hundred yards down the road. Or perhaps
Buddy, with his truck, would try to pull us out with the result that
he too got stuck. Then there were the nights spent going into position
where the impossible was often accomplished,--that was work such as
few outside of the army will experience,--but it was exciting and it
was necessary, and that explains how it was done. Following this were
the nights spent in serving the guns,--sleepless nights,--but it was
fun, and the excitement made it interesting. Last but not least, let us
recall for a second, if we can, how it felt to be under fire,--but most
of us were too busy and tired to have any feelings. Such as they were
they were hardly pleasant.

While most of the Brigade was thus solving its troubles, the 3rd
Battalion of the 303rd was having troubles of its own. Detached from
the Brigade and assigned to the Fourth Corps on November 4th, they
were ordered to take a position a thousand metres in front of the
Seventy-fives and about the same distance behind our own front line.
The terrain assigned them for their guns was a wooded swamp, perhaps a
thousand metres from the road. It was down this road that they brought
their guns under practically continuous enemy fire. Nor did the fire
stop when they reached their positions. Just as regularly as the half
hours came around on the clock so did the Germans go the rounds of
these two batteries and Battalion Headquarters with high explosive and
gas. There were many narrow escapes but no serious casualties. The
dispersion of the German guns and the regularity with which they fired
were alone responsible, so say the Third Battalion. But I am inclined
to think, in spite of German declarations of “Gott mit Uns”, that the
Bon Dieu was on our side; for besides the elements above mentioned,
practically every direct hit or what was so close as to amount to a
direct hit, proved to be a dud. Of the labors involved in taking this
position and the will that delivered the goods we cannot say enough.
The job was done and done gloriously.

While the Brigade, minus one regiment, was disporting itself in and
about St. Mihiel, that regiment, the 301st F. A. was ordered to another
part of the front, November 2nd. Accordingly they went to Neufchateau
near Chaumont, where they were to become a part of the Army Artillery
for the 1st army. There they were held in reserve and obliged to wait
for further orders, which did not come. Finally it was learnt that they
were to move forward and take up positions about November 12th, but the
Germans also hearing of this, signed the Armistice on the 11th. So it
was that our lost regiment did not get into action. We sympathize with
them, but we do not feel as they do, for we know the goods were there
and given the opportunity, would have been delivered. On November
29th they were ordered to prepare for return to the United States.
Many miserable weeks followed at Brest, but finally, one glorious day,
the Statue of Liberty appeared before them and January 6th, 1919, they
landed in New York from the good ship “Nieuw Amsterdam”. In this the
rest of the Brigade fared not so well.

[Illustration: COLONEL ARTHUR CONKLIN]

After the Armistice was signed, the regiments were withdrawn to billets
and the materiel was parked. The 302nd returned to Rupt en Woevre,
where they got busy on the famous show they produced a few weeks
later. The 303rd were not as easily satisfied. They had some troops
still in and about the positions,--some more at Creue, a lot more at
Savannieres, and the 3rd Battalion which had rejoined the regiment was
now at St. Christophe Ferme. Later, the First and Second Battalions
moved to Troyon and the Third Battalion to Ambly, while regimental
Headquarters was established at St. Mihiel.

While thus in billets there were many rumors, but they were mostly
of “occupation” with the Third Army. The fact was, we were kept busy
policing the villages and a good part of France. The part we got was
not in the very best of order, so we had our hands full. At the same
time it was not all work; the 302nd show took us out of the mud and
gunk of the busted villages of France and dropped us temporarily in
front of the foot-lights of Broadway. There were other bright spots but
they were not the weather. Meantime we waited for we knew not what. We
got to know our French brothers in arms, and we sympathized with them
for all they had lost. But they demanded our admiration even more than
our sympathy. In the face of ruined homes and brothers lost, they could
say: “C’est la guerre” and could sing with us the Marseillaise and
Madelon:

  _Quand Madelon vient nous servir a boire
  Sous la tonnelle au frole de son jupon
  Et gue chaqu’un lui raconte une histoire,
  Une histoire a sa façon
  La Madelon pour nous n’est pas sévère
  Lorsqu’on lui prend la taille ou le menton,
  Elle rit, c’est tous le mal qu’elle sait faire,
  Madelon,      Madelon,      Madelon._




IV. HOME


On December 20th the order to prepare arrived. Prepare for what? The
United States of America. My God was it possible? Where were they? But
it was so, and a better Christmas present would have been hard to find.
This was our second Christmas in the army, and apparently it was to be
our last. Cheers! The occasion however recalled a remark attributed
to General Pershing in August as follows: “Hell, Heaven or Hoboken by
Christmas.” He was right, and we got seats at the first show on his
list.

On January 3rd 1919, the Brigade was ordered to Bordeaux for
transportation to the United States, and on January 8th it entrained
at Bannoncourt. It was hoped by all that we would return to our old
billets,--but no, they took us back to that Godforsaken Camp de Souge.
We arrived January 11th. However it would not be for long and we were
on our way home. All were cheerful,--some artificially so. Little did
we realize that it was to be a stay of three long months and that we
would be allowed to amuse ourselves with skinning mules and guard duty.
Looking backwards we can laugh, but I doubt if we could have done so
at the time had we known how long it was to be. On February 4th the
General and some of his staff sailed from Genecart on the “Matsonia”.
This was encouraging; we would follow soon, but we did not. However on
March 18th we moved to Pauillac, about twenty-five miles down the river
from Bordeaux, where there are docks and delousing plants.

And on April 13th we sailed for Boston on the “Santa Rosa”. And here I
must leave, for it is the author’s desire that this little sketch be
ready when the brigade lands.

And what has it all amounted to? To many at first thought it has been
but a year and a half taken out of their lives. But let us consider
for a second. Here was every American energy bent for the first time
to the accomplishment of a single purpose. The individual and his
every interest was sacrificed for a great cause. We learned that there
was something bigger than self and more worth while. We learned to
appreciate our vast country as we should have been able to do in no
other way.

  “NOT WHAT WE DID,
  BUT WHAT WE WERE WILLING TO DO.”




INDIVIDUAL SERVICE RECORD




AUTOGRAPHS




FOOTNOTES:


[A] Kitchen Police.

[B] The 346th and 347th regiments were temporarily brigaded with us for
administrative purposes.

[C] Poste de Commande

[D] The Eiffel Tower was known among the operators as “Ethel”.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE 151ST FIELD ARTILLERY BRIGADE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.