ADDRESS OF PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT
                      AT THE LAYING OF THE CORNER
                    STONE OF THE OFFICE BUILDING OF
                     THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
                       SATURDAY, APRIL 14, 1906


                            [Illustration]


                              WASHINGTON
                      GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                 1906




Over a century ago Washington laid the corner stone of the Capitol
in what was then little more than a tract of wooded wilderness here
beside the Potomac. We now find it necessary to provide by great
additional buildings for the business of the Government. This growth
in the need for the housing of the Government is but a proof and
example of the way in which the nation has grown and the sphere of
action of the National Government has grown. We now administer the
affairs of a nation in which the extraordinary growth of population
has been outstripped by the growth of wealth and the growth in complex
interests. The material problems that face us to-day are not such as
they were in Washington’s time, but the underlying facts of human
nature are the same now as they were then. Under altered external
form we war with the same tendencies toward evil that were evident in
Washington’s time, and are helped by the same tendencies for good. It
is about some of these that I wish to say a word to-day.

In Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress you may recall the description of the
Man with the Muck-rake, the man who could look no way but downward,
with the muck-rake in his hand; who was offered a celestial crown for
his muck-rake, but who would neither look up nor regard the crown he
was offered, but continued to rake to himself the filth of the floor.

In Pilgrim’s Progress the Man with the Muck-rake is set forth as the
example of him whose vision is fixed on carnal instead of on spiritual
things. Yet he also typifies the man who in this life consistently
refuses to see aught that is lofty, and fixes his eyes with solemn
intentness only on that which is vile and debasing. Now, it is very
necessary that we should not flinch from seeing what is vile and
debasing. There is filth on the floor, and it must be scraped up with
the muck-rake; and there are times and places where this service is the
most needed of all the services that can be performed. But the man who
never does anything else, who never thinks or speaks or writes, save of
his feats with the muck-rake, speedily becomes, not a help to society,
not an incitement to good, but one of the most potent forces for evil.

There are, in the body politic, economic and social, many and grave
evils, and there is urgent necessity for the sternest war upon them.
There should be relentless exposure of and attack upon every evil
man, whether politician or business man, every evil practice, whether
in politics, in business, or in social life. I hail as a benefactor
every writer or speaker, every man who, on the platform, or in book,
magazine, or newspaper, with merciless severity makes such attack,
provided always that he in his turn remembers that the attack is of
use only if it is absolutely truthful. The liar is no whit better than
the thief, and if his mendacity takes the form of slander, he may be
worse than most thieves. It puts a premium upon knavery untruthfully
to attack an honest man, or even with hysterical exaggeration to
assail a bad man with untruth. An epidemic of indiscriminate assault
upon character does not good, but very great harm. The soul of every
scoundrel is gladdened whenever an honest man is assailed, or even
when a scoundrel is untruthfully assailed.

Now, it is easy to twist out of shape what I have just said, easy to
affect to misunderstand it, and, if it is slurred over in repetition,
not difficult really to misunderstand it. Some persons are sincerely
incapable of understanding that to denounce mud slinging does not mean
the indorsement of whitewashing; and both the interested individuals
who need whitewashing, and those others who practice mud slinging,
like to encourage such confusion of ideas. One of the chief counts
against those who make indiscriminate assault upon men in business or
men in public life, is that they invite a reaction which is sure to
tell powerfully in favor of the unscrupulous scoundrel who really ought
to be attacked, who ought to be exposed, who ought, if possible, to
be put in the penitentiary. If Aristides is praised overmuch as just,
people get tired of hearing it; and overcensure of the unjust finally
and from similar reasons results in their favor.

Any excess is almost sure to invite a reaction; and, unfortunately, the
reaction, instead of taking the form of punishment of those guilty of
the excess, is very apt to take the form either of punishment of the
unoffending or of giving immunity, and even strength, to offenders. The
effort to make financial or political profit out of the destruction
of character can only result in public calamity. Gross and reckless
assaults on character, whether on the stump or in newspaper, magazine,
or book, create a morbid and vicious public sentiment, and at the same
time act as a profound deterrent to able men of normal sensitiveness
and tend to prevent them from entering the public service at any price.
As an instance in point, I may mention that one serious difficulty
encountered in getting the right type of men to dig the Panama Canal is
the certainty that they will be exposed, both without, and, I am sorry
to say, sometimes within, Congress, to utterly reckless assaults on
their character and capacity.

At the risk of repetition let me say again that my plea is, not for
immunity to but for the most unsparing exposure of the politician who
betrays his trust, of the big business men who makes or spends his
fortune in illegitimate or corrupt ways. There should be a resolute
effort to hunt every such man out of the position he has disgraced.
Expose the crime, and hunt down the criminal; but remember that even
in the case of crime, if it is attacked in sensational, lurid, and
untruthful fashion, the attack may do more damage to the public mind
than the crime itself. It is because I feel that there should be no
rest in the endless war against the forces of evil that I ask that the
war be conducted with sanity as well as with resolution. The men with
the muck-rakes are often indispensable to the well-being of society;
but only if they know when to stop raking the muck, and to look upward
to the celestial crown above them, to the crown of worthy endeavor.
There are beautiful things above and round about them; and if they
gradually grow to feel that the whole world is nothing but muck, their
power of usefulness is gone. If the whole picture is painted black
there remains no hue whereby to single out the rascals for distinction
from their fellows. Such painting finally induces a kind of moral
color-blindness; and people affected by it come to the conclusion that
no man is really black, and no man really white, but they are all gray.
In other words, they neither believe in the truth of the attack, nor
in the honesty of the man who is attacked; they grow as suspicious of
the accusation as of the offense; it becomes well-nigh hopeless to stir
them either to wrath against wrongdoing or to enthusiasm for what is
right; and such a mental attitude in the public gives hope to every
knave, and is the despair of honest men.

To assail the great and admitted evils of our political and industrial
life with such crude and sweeping generalizations as to include decent
men in the general condemnation means the searing of the public
conscience. There results a general attitude either of cynical belief
in and indifference to public corruption or else of a distrustful
inability to discriminate between the good and the bad. Either attitude
is fraught with untold damage to the country as a whole. The fool who
has not sense to discriminate between what is good and what is bad is
well-nigh as dangerous as the man who does discriminate and yet chooses
the bad. There is nothing more distressing to every good patriot, to
every good American, than the hard, scoffing spirit which treats the
allegation of dishonesty in a public man as a cause for laughter.
Such laughter is worse than the crackling of thorns under a pot, for
it denotes not merely the vacant mind, but the heart in which high
emotions have been choked before they could grow to fruition.

There is any amount of good in the world, and there never was a time
when loftier and more disinterested work for the betterment of mankind
was being done than now. The forces that tend for evil are great and
terrible, but the forces of truth and love and courage and honesty
and generosity and sympathy are also stronger than ever before. It
is a foolish and timid, no less than a wicked thing, to blink the
fact that the forces of evil are strong, but it is even worse to fail
to take into account the strength of the forces that tell for good.
Hysterical sensationalism is the very poorest weapon wherewith to fight
for lasting righteousness. The men who with stern sobriety and truth
assail the many evils of our time, whether in the public press, or in
magazines, or in books, are the leaders and allies of all engaged in
the work for social and political betterment. But if they give good
reason for distrust of what they say, if they chill the ardor of those
who demand truth as a primary virtue, they thereby betray the good
cause, and play into the hands of the very men against whom they are
nominally at war.

In his Ecclesiastical Polity that fine old Elizabethan divine, Bishop
Hooker, wrote:

    “He that goeth about to persuade a multitude that they are
    not so well governed as they ought to be, shall never want
    attentive and favorable hearers; because they know the manifold
    defects whereunto every kind of regimen is subject, but the
    secret lets and difficulties, which in public proceedings
    are innumerable and inevitable, they have not ordinarily the
    judgment to consider.”

This truth should be kept constantly in mind by every free people
desiring to preserve the sanity and poise indispensable to the
permanent success of self-government. Yet, on the other hand, it
is vital not to permit this spirit of sanity and self-command
to degenerate into mere mental stagnation. Bad though a state of
hysterical excitement is, and evil though the results are which come
from the violent oscillations such excitement invariably produces,
yet a sodden acquiescence in evil is even worse. At this moment we
are passing through a period of great unrest――social, political, and
industrial unrest. It is of the utmost importance for our future
that this should prove to be not the unrest of mere rebelliousness
against life, of mere dissatisfaction with the inevitable inequality
of conditions, but the unrest of a resolute and eager ambition to
secure the betterment of the individual and the nation. So far as this
movement of agitation throughout the country takes the form of a fierce
discontent with evil, of a determination to punish the authors of evil,
whether in industry or politics, the feeling is to be heartily welcomed
as a sign of healthy life.

If, on the other hand, it turns into a mere crusade of appetite
against appetite, of a contest between the brutal greed of the
“have-nots” and the brutal greed of the “haves,” then it has no
significance for good, but only for evil. If it seeks to establish a
line of cleavage, not along the line which divides good men from bad,
but along that other line, running at right angles thereto, which
divides those who are well off from those who are less well off, then
it will be fraught with immeasurable harm to the body politic.

We can no more and no less afford to condone evil in the man of capital
than evil in the man of no capital. The wealthy man who exults because
there is a failure of justice in the effort to bring some trust magnate
to an account for his misdeeds is as bad as, and no worse than, the
so-called labor leader who clamorously strives to excite a foul class
feeling on behalf of some other labor leader who is implicated in
murder. One attitude is as bad as the other, and no worse; in each case
the accused is entitled to exact justice; and in neither case is there
need of action by others which can be construed into an expression of
sympathy for crime.

It is a prime necessity that if the present unrest is to result in
permanent good the emotion shall be translated into action, and that
the action shall be marked by honesty, sanity, and self-restraint.
There is mighty little good in a mere spasm of reform. The reform that
counts is that which comes through steady, continuous growth; violent
emotionalism leads to exhaustion.

It is important to this people to grapple with the problems connected
with the amassing of enormous fortunes, and the use of those fortunes,
both corporate and individual, in business. We should discriminate
in the sharpest way between fortunes well-won and fortunes ill-won;
between those gained as an incident to performing great services to the
community as a whole, and those gained in evil fashion by keeping just
within the limits of mere law-honesty. Of course no amount of charity
in spending such fortunes in any way compensates for misconduct in
making them. As a matter of personal conviction, and without pretending
to discuss the details or formulate the system, I feel that we shall
ultimately have to consider the adoption of some such scheme as that
of a progressive tax on all fortunes, beyond a certain amount, either
given in life or devised or bequeathed upon death to any individual――a
tax so framed as to put it out of the power of the owner of one of
these enormous fortunes to hand on more than a certain amount to any
one individual; the tax, of course, to be imposed by the National and
not the State government. Such taxation should, of course, be aimed
merely at the inheritance or transmission in their entirety of those
fortunes swollen beyond all healthy limits.

Again, the National Government must in some form exercise supervision
over corporations engaged in interstate business――and all large
corporations are engaged in interstate business――whether by license
or otherwise, so as to permit us to deal with the far-reaching evils
of over-capitalization. This year we are making a beginning in the
direction of serious effort to settle some of these economic problems
by the railway-rate legislation. Such legislation, if so framed, as
I am sure it will be, as to secure definite and tangible results,
will amount to something of itself; and it will amount to a great deal
more in so far as it is taken as a first step in the direction of a
policy of superintendence and control over corporate wealth engaged
in interstate commerce, this superintendence and control not to be
exercised in a spirit of malevolence toward the men who have created
the wealth, but with the firm purpose both to do justice to them and to
see that they in their turn do justice to the public at large.

The first requisite in the public servants who are to deal in this
shape with corporations, whether as legislators or as executives, is
honesty. This honesty can be no respecter of persons. There can be no
such thing as unilateral honesty. The danger is not really from corrupt
corporations; it springs from the corruption itself, whether exercised
for or against corporations.

The eighth commandment reads, “Thou shalt not steal.” It does not read,
“Thou shalt not steal from the rich man.” It does not read, “Thou
shalt not steal from the poor man.” It reads simply and plainly, “Thou
shalt not steal.” No good whatever will come from that warped and mock
morality which denounces the misdeeds of men of wealth and forgets
the misdeeds practiced at their expense; which denounces bribery, but
blinds itself to blackmail; which foams with rage if a corporation
secures favors by improper methods, and merely leers with hideous mirth
if the corporation is itself wronged. The only public servant who can
be trusted honestly to protect the rights of the public against the
misdeed of a corporation is that public man who will just as surely
protect the corporation itself from wrongful aggression. If a public
man is willing to yield to popular clamor and do wrong to the men of
wealth or to rich corporations, it may be set down as certain that if
the opportunity comes he will secretly and furtively do wrong to the
public in the interest of a corporation.

But, in addition to honesty, we need sanity. No honesty will make
a public man useful if that man is timid or foolish, if he is a
hot-headed zealot or an impracticable visionary. As we strive for
reform we find that it is not at all merely the case of a long uphill
pull. On the contrary, there is almost as much of breeching work as
of collar work; to depend only on traces means that there will soon
be a runaway and an upset. The men of wealth who to-day are trying to
prevent the regulation and control of their business in the interest of
the public by the proper Government authorities will not succeed, in
my judgment, in checking the progress of the movement. But if they did
succeed they would find that they had sown the wind and would surely
reap the whirlwind, for they would ultimately provoke the violent
excesses which accompany a reform coming by convulsion instead of by
steady and natural growth.

On the other hand, the wild preachers of unrest and discontent,
the wild agitators against the entire existing order, the men who
act crookedly, whether because of sinister design or from mere
puzzle-headedness, the men who preach destruction without proposing
any substitute for what they intend to destroy, or who propose a
substitute which would be far worse than the existing evils――all these
men are the most dangerous opponents of real reform. If they get their
way they will lead the people into a deeper pit than any into which
they could fall under the present system. If they fail to get their way
they will still do incalculable harm by provoking the kind of reaction,
which in its revolt against the senseless evil of their teaching, would
enthrone more securely than ever the very evils which their misguided
followers believe they are attacking.

More important than aught else is the development of the broadest
sympathy of man for man. The welfare of the wage-worker, the welfare
of the tiller of the soil, upon these depend the welfare of the entire
country; their good is not to be sought in pulling down others; but
their good must be the prime object of all our statesmanship.

Materially we must strive to secure a broader economic opportunity
for all men, so that each shall have a better chance to show the stuff
of which he is made. Spiritually and ethically we must strive to bring
about clean living and right thinking. We appreciate that the things of
the body are important; but we appreciate also that the things of the
soul are immeasurably more important. The foundation stone of national
life is, and ever must be, the high individual character of the average
citizen.

                   *       *       *       *       *



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADDRESS OF PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT AT THE LAYING OF THE CORNER STONE OF THE OFFICE BUILDING OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, SATURDAY, APRIL 14, 1906 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.