[Illustration: SEPTEMBER, 1888.

The American Missionary

VOL. XLII.

NO. 9.]




[Illustration: CONTENTS]


  EDITORIAL.

    ANNUAL MEETING—FINANCIAL,                              237
    A CREED—PARAGRAPHS,                                    238
    MR. MOODY—AFRICA—SIOUX BILL,                           239
    MOUNTAIN WORK AND THE COLORED PEOPLE,                  240
    EMANCIPATION IN BRAZIL,                                241
    INTER-BLENDING OF MISSIONARY WORK,                     242
    SCHOOL ECHOES—EXTRACT,                                 244
    DEATH OF MRS. L. A. ORR,                               245
    ON TO JESUS; ON TO GOD,                                246


  THE SOUTH.

    NOTES IN THE SADDLE. By District Secretary Ryder,      246
    THE BUSY WORKERS,                                      248
    TALLADEGA COLLEGE,                                     249
    TRINITY SCHOOL, ATHENS, ALA.,                          251


  STUDENT’S LETTER.

    HOW I WON MY SCHOOL,                                   252


  THE INDIANS.

    SPEECH OF AN INDIAN CHIEF,                             255
    FORT YATES, DAKOTA,                                    255


  THE CHINESE.

    CHRISTIAN CHINESE EN ROUTE TO CHINA,                   256


  BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

    LETTER FROM SAN FRANCISCO,                             259


  OUR YOUNG FOLKS.

    LITTLE INDIANS,                                        260


  RECEIPTS,                                                261


                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK:

         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

  Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class
                              matter.




American Missionary Association.

                 *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT, REV. WM. M. TAYLOR, D.D., LL.D., N.Y.


  _Vice-Presidents._

    Rev. A. J. F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. D. O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.


  _Corresponding Secretaries._

    Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Treasurer._

    H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Auditors._

    PETER MCCARTEE.
    CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


  _Executive Committee._

    JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
    ADDISON P. FOSTER, Secretary.

    _For Three Years._

      LYMAN ABBOTT,
      CHARLES A. HULL,
      J. R. DANFORTH,
      CLINTON B. FISK,
      ADDISON P. FOSTER,

    _For Two Years._

      S. B. HALLIDAY,
      SAMUEL HOLMES,
      SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
      CHARLES L. MEAD,
      ELBERT B. MONROE,

    _For One Year._

      J. E. RANKIN,
      WM. H. WARD,
      J. W. COOPER,
      JOHN H. WASHBURN,
      EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.


  _District Secretaries._

    Rev. C. J. RYDER, _21 Cong’l House, Boston_.
    Rev. J. E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago_.


  _Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

    Rev. CHAS. W. SHELTON.


  _Secretary of Woman’s Bureau._

    Miss D. E. EMERSON, _56 Reade St., N.Y._

       *       *       *       *       *


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY,”
to the Editor, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may
be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association,’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

          VOL. XLII.       SEPTEMBER, 1888.       NO. 9.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

                 *       *       *       *       *


The next Annual Meeting of the American Missionary Association will
be held at Providence, R.I., commencing at three o’clock Tuesday
afternoon, October 23d. Rev. Arthur Little, D.D., of Chicago,
will preach the sermon. On the last page of the cover will be
found directions as to membership and other items of interest.
Fuller details regarding the reception of delegates and their
entertainment, together with rates at hotels, and railroad and
steamboat reductions, will be given in the religious press and in
the next number of the MISSIONARY.

A meeting of great interest is expected, and we trust our friends
will make their preparations in due time to be present.

                 *       *       *       *       *

OUR RECEIPTS for the ten months ending July 31st are $235,884.73,
an increase of $6,377.40 as compared with the corresponding months
of last year. The increase from collections is $12,628.92, and
the decrease from legacies is $6,251.52, leaving the net increase
as stated. This increase from collections is gratifying; but our
expenditures during the last ten months have been $27,079.89
greater than for the same months last year.

This increase has been due not only to the imperative demands for
the enlargement of the work, but to the added facilities afforded
by the contributions of friends who have realized these needs and
have provided the necessary buildings and improvements.

The patrons of the Association have been wont to rally in the
month of September to save us from debt. Our average receipts
from _collections_ for that month for the past three years have
been $38,000, which is nearly double the average of our monthly
collections for the past year. We hope our friends have not lost
their zeal in our work, and that their hearts are as warm and their
hands as liberal as ever.

We ask their attention to the two items that follow:


_A Practical, Thoughtful Man._

A gentleman once said to a Secretary of this Association: “I
contribute regularly to all our Congregational societies, and in
addition to that I lay aside $100 for the society that stands
in the greatest need. I notice that one or the other of these
societies comes to the close of its fiscal year threatened with
debt, and this year I think the American Missionary Association
must have the $100.”

Thanks were duly expressed.


_A Creed._

We believe that there are many such practical, thoughtful men in
our churches who lay by money, some more, some less, for this good
purpose.

We believe there are many more Christian people, who, while they do
not plan so definitely, yet keep watch of the benevolent societies,
and come to the rescue in time of need.

We believe that some give out of their abundance, and others,
feeling themselves somewhat straitened yet realizing the
difficulties of a benevolent society in like circumstances, decide,
in the spirit of Christian self-sacrifice, to aid with their mite
the embarrassed society.

We believe there are pastors, devoted and efficient in their parish
work, who yet are broad-minded and large-hearted enough to keep a
watchful eye on the interests of the great missionary societies,
and, at the appropriate time, to urge upon their churches liberal
contributions for the hour of need.

We believe that, at this time, the American Missionary Association
is the society needing special help at the close of its financial
year, and we earnestly exhort practical, thoughtful Christians and
churches to make special remembrance of our wants by prompt and
liberal contributions during the month of September.

       *       *       *       *       *

WE begin this month the publication of a series of letters received
from students or graduates of our various institutions in the
South. They will be found very readable. Those of our friends who
begin the one we publish in this number will read it through, we
are very sure, and will be glad to read the others as they come in
successive numbers.

       *       *       *       *       *

HOW BRIEF the passage from life to death. This number of THE
MISSIONARY contains a very interesting sketch of the Commencement
exercises at Talladega College, written by Mrs. L. A. Orr; and
yet, on another page, will be found the record of her death. Happy
are they who are toiling in the Master’s vineyard when the summons
comes.

       *       *       *       *       *

WE had the pleasure of an intimate acquaintance with Rev. G. D.
Pike, D.D., for nearly twenty years. We knew that his studies ran
beyond the range of official work, but we never suspected that he
indulged in writing verses. Since his death, several hymns have
been found, written by him, and, on another page, we present one
of these. It was written during his absence for his health and when
he regarded the end of life as not far off, and indicates his faith
and hope. The many friends of Dr. Pike will be glad to read this.

       *       *       *       *       *


MR. MOODY.

Mr. Moody as a lay evangelist has made a marvellous, a unique,
record in modern Christian labors. No layman, and few clergymen,
have surpassed him in this peculiar work. But Mr. Moody’s efforts
in another line are attracting the attention and admiration of
Christians in all parts of the world. We venture the prediction
that one hundred years hence Mr. Moody will be better known by
the schools he has founded than by the evangelistic work he has
done. There is something about a permanent institution, like the
opening of a living spring on the hillside, that is refreshing
and perennial. John Harvard and Elihu Yale opened such fountains.
Other men of to-day are doing the same thing in the South, either
by the consecration of permanent funds or the founding of permanent
institutions. May their number be multiplied.

       *       *       *       *       *


AFRICA.

Alas for poor Africa! The day of her redemption lingereth. The
rebellion of the Mahdi hindered the progress of civilization in
the vast regions of the Upper Nile. It occurred precisely at the
time that Rev. Dr. Ladd was making his explorations near the mouth
of the Sobat, with a view to the establishment of the Arthington
Mission. The hope that was entertained that this sudden and
disastrous outbreak would soon be quelled has been disappointed.
The Mahdi is dead, but he has a successor, Khalifa Abdullah,
who, if he does not inherit the Mahdi’s remarkable powers, yet
can suffice to keep the Soudan in turmoil. Emin Bey has not been
rescued and Stanley’s whereabouts and safety are uncertain. Is
it not time that the duty of the American of African descent to
the land of his fathers should be pressed upon him, and that the
Christian church should help to prepare him for that duty?

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SIOUX BILL.

The friends of the Indians have sought earnestly and successfully
to secure proper legislation looking to the civilization of the
Indians. The Dawes Bill and the Sioux Bill have been hailed with
joy as important steps in this direction.

But Senator Dawes himself and other intelligent friends of the
Indians have foreseen the possible difficulties in the way. The
refusal of the Indians to sign the treaty at the recent council
at Standing Rock, and the indication at this writing that the
same refusal will meet the Commissioners at the Cheyenne, Rosebud
and Pine Ridge Agencies, present the picket lines of these
difficulties. But beyond all these lie the stronger hindrances.
The great trouble is that the Indian is still an Indian, in his
ignorance, his want of training for civilized life, his dislike
of work, and his incompetency to make profitable use of the lands
and teams and implements proffered to him. Of what use to any
man, white or Indian, is 160 acres of land if he doesn’t want it,
if he doesn’t know how to use it, and can’t make a living on it?
After all that has been said and done, the thing that the Indian
needs is a _Christian education_. If he has that, he will know how
to work and will be inclined to work, and will become a good and
self-supporting citizen. Christian friends of the Indian! rally to
the great work of Christianing these Indians. The primer and the
New Testament are their great want.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE MOUNTAIN WORK AND THE COLORED PEOPLE.

There are three things which give special emphasis to the
importance of pushing forward the “Mountain Work.”

1. The great material, intellectual and spiritual destitution of
the more than two million people of our Southern mountains—a people
of good natural endowments, who respond readily to the life-giving
impulses of a pure gospel—is the thing which appeals most directly
to our sympathy.

2. Many well-informed business men are confidently declaring that
this is the richest mineral region of the world. Already they are
either building or planning railroads through every part of the
mountains, which are made profitable not only by the wonderful
mines which open at their approach, but also by the great forests
of black walnut, poplar, and other valuable timber. This, of
course, means that the present primitive condition of things
cannot long remain. It must give way to something else. Whether it
shall be to godlessness and wickedness of every form, or whether
the natural religiousness of the people shall be met with pure
and uplifting gospel influences—with the Church and the Christian
school—depends in a large measure on what our churches and
individual Christians say through the treasury of this Association.
What will take years of work and thousands of dollars in the future
can now be done in months and with hundreds.

3. But this work has a connection with our other Southern work
which has been little noted. These mountains extend down into the
very heart of the South, in a territory 200 miles broad and 500
miles long. In the late war, the people were loyal to the Union
almost to a man, and thousands of them fought for its preservation.
Slaves were few among them, and colored people are now scarcely
more numerous than they are in the North, though the proportion
is increasing. The result is a natural affiliation with what
are known as “Northern Ideas.” The feeling against a Christian
treatment of the colored people is neither so bitter nor so
deep-rooted as elsewhere in the South. It has been demonstrated
that no-caste churches and schools can be established and
maintained, and the general sentiment of the whole region can, by
vigorous missionary work, be moulded to the Christian view.

The people of this region—vivified and developed, intellectually
and spiritually, on the broad basis of Congregational Christianity;
believing in, and practicing, the doctrine that all men were
created free and equal and should have equal rights in all
public matters; and, in their new and fast-increasing commercial
importance, in constant contact with other portions of the
South—would furnish an unanswerable argument against the fears of
the Southern white people with reference to the amalgamation of
the races, and other direful results, which would follow a just
treatment of the colored man. “And seeing the man which was healed
standing with them, they could say nothing against it.”

       *       *       *       *       *


EMANCIPATION IN BRAZIL—WHAT IS TO FOLLOW?

It is a curious fact that, in precisely the last fifty years,
slavery has been abolished by the four great nations holding the
greatest number of slaves and representing the three great forms
of the Christian religion—the Protestant, the Greek and the Roman
Catholic.

Thus England, a Protestant power, emancipated her slaves in the
West Indies in 1838; Russia, of the Greek Church, freed her serfs
in 1861; the United States, a Protestant nation, emancipated her
slaves in 1863; and now, Brazil, a Roman Catholic empire, completes
the circle by emancipating her slaves in 1888.

While these facts are remarkable, and present cause for profound
gratitude to God, there is yet a lesson of vital importance to be
learned which Brazil needs to understand, and which, indeed, the
other nations are not fully practicing.

In the British West Indies, very few white people remained after
emancipation, and the blacks lacked their guidance and example; and
besides this, it was years afterwards before the British Government
made any adequate provision for the education of the ex-slaves.
From these two causes have come nearly all the evils that have
grown out of the emancipation.

Russia presents a still more striking lesson. In 1861, as the
result of a great national movement towards constitutional liberty,
her fifty millions of serfs were emancipated. The next year, she
celebrated the thousandth anniversary of her national existence,
and the enthusiasm for a free government was intensified. But all
these hopes were dashed—no new constitution was given, the Czar
ruled autocratically as before, the serfs were not educated or
enfranchised, and largely sunk into ignorance and intemperance.
The result of all has been nihilism, and the Czar lives in hourly
fear of death, and rules his people by terror, the prison and
Siberia.

The United States has done far better. It enfranchised the slave
and made him a citizen; the National Government, through the
Freedmen’s Bureau, expended several millions of dollars for his
education; the States organized public school systems, and the
benevolent people of the North rendered still more effective
service, being the first to introduce the work, acting always, when
permitted, in co-operation with the Bureau and with the States,
and continuing its work, blending the educational largely with the
religious. But in spite of all this, a dark cloud gathers on our
horizon—the blacks are not allowed the free enjoyment of their
guaranteed rights, and the facilities for educational and religious
enlightenment are entirely inadequate. Three millions of the
blacks of ten years of age and upward, in 1880, could not write.
America needs not only to ponder these facts, but to act upon them
promptly, if it would avert the impending danger.

In these facts Brazil should read her warning. If her ex-slaves
are left in ignorance and vice, she has her work only begun, and
the last end may be worse than the beginning. The laws of Brazil
have favored gradual emancipation. It was the work of a woman that
completed it. In the absence of the Emperor, who was sick in Italy,
his daughter, as Regent, issued the final decree.

May we not hope that the womanly wisdom and philanthropy which
dictated the initial act may prompt to the persevering use of
the means of the last great duty? And may we not hope that, as
thousands of the educated women of the North devoted themselves
to the uplifting of the blacks in the Southern States, so their
sisters in Brazil may give the crowning glory to emancipation in
Brazil?

       *       *       *       *       *


INTER-BLENDING OF MISSIONARY WORK.

The great London Missionary Conference, recently held, awakened
much enthusiasm on the spot in behalf of foreign missions, and we
believe that the published records and addresses will intensify
and perpetuate that salutary influence. The Christian world needs
arousing to the great work of the church in heathen lands.

There is, however, an inter-blending in all parts of missionary
work that should never be overlooked. The home field is the source
of the means, and men, and prayers, that must energize the work
in the foreign field. Dead churches at home cannot give life to
mission work abroad.

There is another form in which the home and foreign fields are
blended. The American Missionary Association is ranked, and
properly, as a home missionary organization, but it has its
relations to the foreign field.

1. It is called to train the Freedmen of America for mission work
in Africa. White men meet a speedy death in malarial Africa, and
they come to the natives as strangers. The Freedmen can better
endure the climate of their fatherland and will be welcomed by the
people as brothers. We believe that the great problem of African
evangelization is destined, in the providence of God, to be largely
solved by the ex-slaves of America.

2. The Indians of the United States have been ranked heretofore as
coming under the work of foreign missions. At one time the American
Board had the largest share of its work among these people. Other
Christian denominations so classed their Indian missions, in part,
at least—and all this properly, for the mass of the Indians are
still heathen. The day will come when the Indian will be lost in
the man, and then gospel work for him will be home or parish work.
But at present the American Missionary Association is doing foreign
mission work in the home field, among these Indians.

3. The Chinaman in America, like the Negro in America, is cultured
and Christianized here very largely for the sake of China. He comes
here not to stay, but to go back to the home of his fathers. Now,
if we don’t stone him, or mob him, but imbue him with the gospel,
he goes back home as a missionary. A specimen of the spirit in
which he returns can be seen in the touching letter from a Chinese
convert in another column of this magazine. The Hong Kong Mission,
established under the auspices of the American Board, and to which
our converted Chinamen on the Pacific Slope contributed both men
and money, is an illustration of the way in which the American
Missionary Association touches the foreign field in China.

4. Last, but not least. The battle against caste must be fought,
and the victory won, in America. As the last battle against
slavery was fought and won here for the world, so we must fight
the battle of caste here for India as well as for America. Fifty
years ago very wise and good brethren said: “You Abolitionists are
right _theoretically_, slavery is wrong and ought to be abolished
immediately; but _practically_ you are a set of visionaries.
Slavery is a local institution, and if you wish to push your
denominational interests in the South, you must establish your
churches there and let the question of slavery alone.” We have
lived long enough to hear these brethren confess their mistake.
There are wise and good brethren now that say: “_Theoretically_,
caste is all wrong, but it exists and can’t be overthrown, and if
you wish to press your denominational work in the South, you must
ignore that question and plant your churches on the color line.”
Somebody will live to hear those who take this position confessing
their mistake. The American Missionary Association stands now on
the caste question just where it once stood in regard to slavery.
It will neither dodge nor compromise, and will plant schools and
churches in the South, if at all, openly and avowedly disregarding
class distinctions. It makes no effort to bring the races together,
yet any man, woman or child, otherwise qualified, will be welcomed
to its schools and churches, even if God has made him black. In
waging this warfare in America, it is doing a Christian missionary
work against caste in heathen nations of the old world.


SCHOOL ECHOES.

Question.—“When and how long did Solomon reign?”

Answer.—“10,000 years before Christ. He rained forty days and forty
nights.”

Question.—“Susy, can you tell me what I read to you about
yesterday?”

Answer.—“Christ and the twelve opossums.”

In Mississippi, one of our teachers taught her class faithfully the
golden text, “Put off thy shoes from off thy feet; for the place
whereon thou standest is holy ground.” The next Sunday, only one
girl could remember it, and she recited it thus: “Moses, Moses,
take off them shoes.”

The colored preachers of the old time, in selecting their
illustrations from Bible characters, are wont to give them a
strongly imaginative turn; as for instance when one, in a long
story of Abraham’s trial in offering up Isaac, represented him as
“going along, holding on and not making any fuss during the journey
by day, but at night when Isaac was not by, as praying and crying
all night.”


ENGLISH AS SHE IS WRITTEN BY INDIAN STUDENTS.

THE RACES.—They are five races, which are the white and yellow, and
black and red and brown. The yellow race likes to eat rat, and the
black race likes to eat man, and the white race likes to eat frog,
and the red race likes to eat buffalo.

The Caucasian is the strongest in the world. The semi-civilized
have their own civilization, but not like the white race.
The savage race kept their own ways, and they have had three
occupations: they were hunted, fished and foughted to the other
people. They beat, too. The white race have three occupations:
agriculture, manufacturing and commerce.

The white people they are civilized; they have everything, and go
to school, too. They learn how to read and write so they can read
newspaper. The yellow people they half civilized, some of them know
how to read and write, and some know how to take care of themself.
The red people they big savages; they don’t know anything.

       *       *       *       *       *


EXTRACT.

  We do not print the extract given below because it has our
  approval, but because it is taken from a newspaper published by
  colored men, and is significant.

We have yet to learn that unless we organize for self-protection
and make use of our organization, we shall continue to be used as
foot-balls, and a target for infuriated white mobs. Unless we take
active and aggressive measures for our safety, we shall continue to
receive treatment which should not be administered to the beasts
of the field. We do not believe there should exist one law for
the white man and one law for the black man, as there exists in
the South to-day. We are all sovereign citizens, and should be
protected by the laws alike. The present dispensation of the law
in the South is an infamous outrage, and is unworthy of a great
country like ours.

What is the remedy for this state of affairs? History shows that
sooner or later oppressed people arise from their lethargy, and
take by force that which is denied them by the laws of their
country. What we need to do, is to organize such societies as the
one so earnestly advocated by the editor of the late _Freeman_, and
use such societies for the enforcement of the law and the obtaining
of our rights when they are denied us.

The colored people of this country need not expect that their white
fellow-citizens are going to aid them in this struggle, so we might
as well put our shoulder to the wheel, buckle on our armor and
go forth to the conflict with stern faces and undaunted courage.
Blessings never come to those who recline upon the indolent couch
of ease and wait for them; the honors of this life do not come
unsought; a tree planted does not grow to maturity and produce
abundant fruit unless nurtured and cared for until it is able to
withstand the changes of the seasons. So with our condition in this
country. As long as we remain silent while our rights are being
filched from us, we may expect a continuance of this kind of thing.

Let us organize ourselves into a powerful and extensive
organization and then we shall be in a position to make a
systematic and aggressive, as well as harmonious, struggle for our
rights. If we do this, we shall command the respect of all men,
even if we fail in obtaining what we struggled for. But we shall
not fail. Truth and justice sooner or later triumph, if those who
champion them are only true to themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *


DEATH OF MRS. L. A. ORR.

In the rest and quiet of vacation, death has come to the little
band left at Talladega.

On July 15th, Mrs. Orr passed suddenly away from earth. The day
before, while riding with a friend, the horse stumbled, and falling
forward pulled her out of the buggy to the ground. It was not
supposed she was seriously hurt, but later it was found that the
fall had produced concussion of the brain. In about two hours she
became unconscious, and lay in that condition through all the hours
of the night. At 9:30 on Sabbath morning, without a word or look
of recognition, she passed away. Thus has ended a most useful and
consecrated life. She was president of our W. C. T. U., and none
will be more missed. Tired teachers ever found a warm welcome, rest
and quiet in her pleasant rooms, and guests of the college will
remember with gratitude Mrs. Orr’s careful thoughtfulness for their
comfort.

Leaving a pleasant home at the North and remunerative occupation,
Mr. and Mrs. Orr came into this missionary work with but a single
aim, that of doing good, and nobly has it been accomplished.
By their efforts, mission schools in two out-stations have been
established and funds obtained for a school and church in one,
to be called Clinton Chapel in honor of the donors, most of whom
lived in Clinton, Mass. Mrs. Orr visited these schools. Her
personal presence cheered and encouraged them, and she gave from
her own means with no unsparing hand to further the work. The
death of their friend brings great sorrow to the people of these
neighborhoods, and they are greatly cast down. “Shall we have to
give up our new chapel?” and “What can we do without Mrs. Orr?” are
questions asked on all sides.

Dear friend! God help us to more faithfully and prayerfully carry
on the work you have laid down.

                                                      A. R. D.

       *       *       *       *       *


ON TO JESUS; ON TO GOD.

BY REV. G. D. PIKE, D.D.

    Holy Spirit, comfort me:
      I am sadly stained by sin;
    Help thou mine infirmity,
      Lead me where the Lamb hath been.
        Thou canst guide me o’er the road,
        On to Jesus; on to God.

    I have grieved thee oft and sore,
      Quenched thy gentle, kindly voice;
    Take, O take me evermore,
      Let my soul again rejoice.
        Set my feet upon the road;
        On to Jesus; on to God.

    Finish thou the work in me,
      Now so graciously begun;
    Thanks and praise my song shall be
      To the blessed three in one,
        As I hie me o’er the road,
        On to Jesus; on to God.

    When my mortal days are done;
      When I meet the Lamb that died;
    Grant, O grant thy erring son
      Rest among the glorified,
        Ransomed, saved, along the road.
        On to Jesus; on to God.

MATLOCK BANK, ENG., July 1, 1882.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SOUTH.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES IN THE SADDLE.

BY REV. C. J. RYDER, DISTRICT SECRETARY.

The Sunday-school work of the A. M. A. has always been an important
element of that work. The rapid development of this department
within the past few years has been somewhat remarkable. Our
friends expressed grateful surprise at the Portland meeting that
the statistics were so exceedingly encouraging along this line.
“The total Sunday-school enrollment, as it appears in the Annual
Report of 1882, was 7,835, but we are able to report this year an
enrollment of 15,109, an increase in five years of 7,274, or nearly
100 per cent.,” was the very satisfactory showing as given in the
last Annual Report.

Two interesting bits of history have recently come to me, which
indicate that the Sunday-school work of the Association is
developing with still greater rapidity and success. Reports were
gathered from twenty-two of the students of Straight University,
New Orleans, who taught school during the summer vacation. These
students were not so busy with their work in the day-school
as to neglect their duty as Christians in the organization of
Sunday-schools. They were scattered throughout Louisiana and
Mississippi, and reached many needy fields. They reported the
following facts:

  Number of pupils in the day-schools which were taught by them      1,398
  Number of Sunday-schools organized                                    13
  These students were superintendents or teachers in                    22
  Number of scholars in these Sunday-schools                         1,574
  Number of hopeful conversions to Christ                              168
  Five Bands of Mercy were organized with a membership of              181
  Four Temperance Societies were formed with a membership of           241

These facts furnish us excellent evidence of the judicious and
enthusiastic efforts of these colored students to save and elevate
their own people. _Fifteen hundred and seventy-four_ children
gathered into Sunday-schools, most of whom were absolutely
unreached before, by these twenty-two under-graduates of a single
A. M. A. school!

It is not strange that the President of Straight University, in
giving these facts, adds, with evident satisfaction:

“If a complete record could be made of all the work done in one
year even, by past and present members of our school, or any of the
A. M. A. schools, it would make an aggregate most wonderful.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Turning now to the progress of Sunday-school work in our great
Mountain field, we find the same remarkable development. Calvary
Congregational Church was organized at Pine Mountain, Tenn., Nov.
26, 1887, with thirteen members. The following striking facts are
just reported as the results secured in the past few months by the
energetic Christian workers in this church. Sunday-schools have
been established in the following places, with the enrollment given
below:

  Calvary Church Sunday-school enrolled      142
  Shiloh               “          “          127
  New Prospect         “          “           68
  Lick Creek           “          “           78

making a grand total of 415 children and young people gathered
into these Sunday-schools on the mountain, and only _ten pupils_
of this whole enrollment _had ever been in Sunday-School before_!!
Another school is soon to be formed in this neighborhood. This
“Pine Mountain” field is about 20 × 60 miles, and the little church
which the A. M. A. built during the past few months is the only
framed “church house” in the whole region. Think of it, O Christian
friends, you who hold the Lord’s money in trust, 1,200 square
miles, with cabin homes scattered along every “cove” and fertile
valley, left, to this year of our Lord 1888, with only one suitable
place of worship!

In building this new church, the people themselves have strained
every nerve and made large personal sacrifices. They have had the
occasional services of the General Missionary of the A. M. A. for
that locality, and I visited them once when Field Superintendent.
They have also been assisted from the A. M. A. treasury, but they
have labored in season and out of season themselves in order
to establish this splendid work. The rapid development of the
Sunday-schools is not the only feature of this work that merits our
attention. One member of this church has distributed during the
year 424 new Bibles and 145 second-hand Bibles. He has visited 500
families personally. He found that 60 per cent. of these people
were without the Word of God in complete form. A few had mutilated
copies of the Bible.

       *       *       *       *       *

There are hundreds of fields in the Mountain Work of the A. M. A.
just as needy and just as hopeful as Pine Mountain. All the facts
indicate that God has now opened this field to us. An intelligent
mountaineer said to me, some months ago: “Our great and only hope
lies in the A. M. A. and the Congregational churches of the North.”
Surely these churches will not disappoint this hope, nor refuse to
heed the voice of God speaking to them in all the stirring events
of this Mountain Work.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE BUSY WORKERS.

  The hive of the American Missionary Association in the South
  has no use for drones. The bees are at work summer and winter,
  and they improve not only the “shining hour,” but have to be
  busy in rainy days as well. One of our workers who has long
  been in the field, and who deserves to be kept there still
  longer, writes as follows in accepting re-appointment:

I most cheerfully accept the work for another year, and to show you
that it means work for me I will just give you my programme for the
past two weeks: A rough ride two weeks ago this P.M. to the top of
the mountain, and then on foot down the mountain to Spring City, to
take the night train for Lexington. Got into Lexington Wednesday
morning in a rain. Looked at this and that piece of property during
Wednesday and Thursday, it raining most of the time. Came back
Friday to Helenwood. Made some calls on Saturday and preached at
night. Preached at 11 A.M. next day, and walked eight miles to
Robbins and preached at night. Got up at 3 o’clock and walked four
miles to catch a train that would stop at Glen Mary. Reached Spring
City for breakfast at 6:30. Came up home and answered what letters
I needed to, and went back to Spring City to stay all night. Took
train at six o’clock Tuesday morning for Sunbright. Rode out to
Deer Lodge. Made four pastoral calls, walking four miles to do it,
and was ready for an eight-mile ride in lumber wagon, Wednesday
morning, in the rain to Mt. Vernon to deliver the oration of the
day. Went back to Sunbright next morning and found your letters
of the 3rd. Went to Emory Gap that evening. Walked out two miles
in mud to see Bro. Clark. Came back to Sunbright Friday, so as
to reach Deer Lodge for a church meeting that night. Made some
calls Saturday morning, and then walked three miles to call on a
Congregational family that ought to unite with our church here,
and came back to preach at night. Taught a lesson in Sunday-school
next morning, and preached. Walked to Sunbright, seven miles,
and preached at night. Got up at 2 o’clock to walk seven miles
to Glen Mary to take the early train to reach home and attend to
correspondence so I can get off to Crossville to-morrow.

I do not always have it put on quite so thickly as this, but it is
a pretty fair average.

       *       *       *       *       *


TALLADEGA COLLEGE.

MRS. L. A. ORR.

Talladega College has just passed its eighteenth annual
Commencement which, in many respects, was the most successful ever
held.

The exercises began on Thursday night, June 7th, with an exhibition
in the chapel by the second and third grades of Cassedy School,
followed on Friday by exercises in the Primary Department, and
at night by an exhibition by the fourth and fifth grades of
Cassedy School, all of which reflected credit upon the teachers
in charge. To many of our Northern friends, these may seem a very
insignificant part of Commencement exercises, but to these parents,
who consider all school work a failure which does not close with an
exhibition, and who will travel miles to hear their children “say
their pieces,” they are a very important part. At these exercises
the chapel was crowded almost to suffocation, the hall and windows
were full, and many went away, as they could not find even standing
room.

On Sunday, in the absence of Pres. DeForest, the baccalaureate
sermon was preached by Rev. J. M. Sturtevant, D.D., of Cleveland,
Ohio, and was full of rich thought and practical suggestions.
At night, Rev. G. M. Elliott, of Selma, preached an excellent
missionary sermon, very helpful to the students who go out into the
dark places to labor among their people.

The mornings of Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday were occupied with
public examinations in the different departments, and they all gave
evidence of faithful work having been done by teachers and pupils.
The examinations in theology and moral philosophy were especially
fine, and would do credit to any Northern white students.

Monday night was given to the exercises of the three literary
societies connected with the college and these were conducted
wholly by the students.

On Tuesday afternoon was the inspection of the industrial classes,
printing office, barns, &c. In the large airy sewing-room were
samples of work done by the girls, including quilts, garments of
all kinds, and some very neat darning. In the printing office
several young men were engaged in type-setting, presswork, etc.,
and the neatness of the printed programmes testified to the good
work done by the “college press.” Visitors to the Slater shop
found the blacksmith at his forge, the painter, the glazier and
the cabinet-maker busy at work, and the wonder was that one small
shop could accommodate so many trades. The brick masons were laying
the foundation for an addition to the building, which will give
better facilities for work. The fine stock on the farm, the new and
improved farming tools, the steam engine in operation, and neat
barns, attracted many visitors.

A lecture at night by Dr. Sturtevant, on the subject “Manners,”
closed a very busy day.

Thursday was Commencement and the fullest day of the week. First
came the graduating exercises; the class numbered seven, three
young women and four young men from the Normal Department. Next
came the alumni address and essay, after which the treasurer gave
a brief statement of the resources of the college. The increase in
attendance as compared with last year was more than eighty.

At the alumni dinner, in Foster Hall parlor, were present the
alumni, the Faculty, and friends from the North, South, East and
West, to the number of seventy in all. After supplying our physical
wants, next in order came the toasts and responses. Dr. Andrews was
master of ceremonies and in response to the toast “Our Theological
Work,” Rev. Spencer Snell, of Birmingham, spoke of the great need
of an educated ministry among the colored people, and told an
amusing story of the “call to preach” of a colored man. He was at
work in the field, but soon got tired, and leaning on his hoe, he
said to himself, “Dis hoe am _so_ heaby, an’ dis row am _so_ long,
an’ dis sun am _so_ hot, I tink dis nigger am called to preach de
gospel.”

Next Paul Bledsoe of Laredo, Texas, spoke for “Our Normal Work,”
James Brown for “Our Students,” and Mr. Stephen Childs, of Marion,
for the “Parents of our Students.” Rev. J. Silsby, of Tenn., who
was personally acquainted with the early history of the college,
responded to the toast “The Founding of Talladega College.” “Our
Churches” was responded to by Rev. C. B. Curtis, of Selma, and J.
R. Sims, of Shelby Iron Works. Dr. Andrews closed with a few words
for the college.

At night, W. P. Hamilton and J. A. Jones, who were graduated from
the theological department in 1887, were ordained to the work of
the gospel ministry. This closed the exercises of the week. During
the week, many kind words were spoken for the college by friends
from different parts of the State, showing that the best colored
people in the State appreciate the thorough work done here.

During the week President DeForest was very much missed, but we
all hoped that what was our loss would be his gain in health and
strength from his trip across the ocean.

       *       *       *       *       *


TRINITY SCHOOL, ATHENS, ALA.

Another year of pleasant work has just closed. Teachers and
students, though looking rather worn and weary, are in the happiest
mood, for all feel it has been a _good year_. The latter part of
this school year has been specially characterized by very earnest
study, and an ambition to reach one hundred per cent. in every
thing. _One_ student has done this with a single exception, and
says that he “shall surely make that up during vacation.” All have
attained a higher standing than usual, and our final examinations
were excellent.

Our sending a class to Fisk University this year, with favorable
reports of them coming from month to month, has proved a constant
inspiration to our classes here, and we hope as the years go by, to
send many more in the same direction.

But the great struggle with us is to hold our students long enough
to take them through even an elementary normal course. Parents in
their ignorance and extreme poverty, are in such _a hurry_ to have
their children teach and earn money to help support the younger
ones, that, as soon as they can get a third grade certificate to
teach in the public schools of the State, they are supposed to be
_educated_.

And, too often, the people in the rural districts, impressed with
the wonderful attainments of the young teacher, add to the folly
of the parents in making these young people themselves, (only the
weaker ones), think “they know enough, without going to school any
more,” and so they drift into the ranks of those who “think they
are something, when they are nothing.”

This is one of our discouragements, but we have very much for our
encouragement in the beautiful _homes_ that are springing up all
over this fair South-land, and in the noble band of intelligent,
consecrated, Christian workers who, in pulpits and school-houses,
and in the conscientious and successful management of business, are
leading their people to a higher plane of living and to a truer
citizenship.

Our closing exercises were held on Monday night, May 28, our
twenty-third anniversary. Our large and beautiful hall was
packed as never before. The audience was appreciative and very
enthusiastic. There were visitors from Birmingham and Decatur, and
all the towns along the lines of railroad. They expressed great
interest in what they saw and heard, promising to send us many new
students in October; but the difficulty is to find suitable places
for them to board, as the parents all prefer to have their children
in the Institution under the constant supervision of teachers.

Our exercises were quite novel, and had some unique features that
greatly pleased the patrons. In all that was attempted, the pupils
acquitted themselves well, and the _little_ children especially
pleased the patrons of the school in their beautiful and perfect
Scripture recitations. All the Sunday-school Golden Texts from
October to June, were recited without a mistake, also several
Psalms and an entire chapter from Isaiah. Bible truth planted in
the hearts of these young children, will, we trust, bear precious
fruit in their future lives.

                                                    M. S. WELLS

       *       *       *       *       *




STUDENT’S LETTER.

       *       *       *       *       *


HOW I WON MY SCHOOL.

MR. W. B. ROSS.

In the spring of 1881, I left Fisk University in search of a summer
school. Knowing nowhere else to go, I went to the southwestern
part of Arkansas. I had been informed by a Fisk student that there
were vacancies in Hempstead county, and thither I bent my way in
company with two other young men, also seeking summer employment,
both of whom opened subscription schools in the State. I had taken
two lessons a day in Latin during the school year just ended, and
expected to “double my Greek” the next year. This would necessitate
my being in at the beginning of the school year. I had always been
politically inclined, and so had studied almost every artifice to
win among strangers.

We three rode from Hope, Arkansas, to Washington, a distance of ten
miles, in an old-fashioned ambulance.

On arriving at Washington, we were taken to the house of the
colored teacher of that place. I looked at him; he extended his
hand; I explained our business, and immediately he volunteered to
assist us.

I had a particular school in view on leaving Nashville. On arriving
at Washington, I learned from Mr. Shepperson, the teacher referred
to, that one of the trustees of that school was in town.

I immediately started out in search of him. In a short time I was
presented to a stoutly-built, heavy-set man, who was introduced as
the gentleman I desired to see. I forthwith explained to Mr. Holt,
for such was his name, that I had been informed that there was a
colored school to be taught that summer in his district, and that I
had come hoping I could get it.

“Yes,” said he, “there is a school there, but it will be a month
before it can open.”

“Is that so?” said I. “I don’t see what I’ll do. Have you any
objections to its being opened now?”

“Oh, no; if the colored people are willing, I am,” said he.

But I could see in the tone of his voice something that showed an
unwillingness to have the school begin before Mr. Holt’s cotton
was worked out. However, I took him at his word, and set out in
the hot sun and sand, with my satchel on my back, to the desired
plantation. On the way, I saw two million lizzards, one billion
spiders, and a trillion scorpions, to say nothing of tarantulas
and centipedes that appeared in countless numbers along my path.
I arrived at Mr. H.’s house about six o’clock in the evening, and
proceeded immediately to the cabin where the colored people lived.
Finding no one at the cabin, I went to the field.

“Good evening,” said I to an old colored lady.

“Good evenin’,” said she.

“I am from Fisk University, Nashville, Tenn. I have come out here
to teach this school for you.”

“Whar’s ’Fesser Thomson?” said she.

“I don’t know where the Professor is, but I’ll teach for you. My
name is Ross.”

“Yas, sah.”

“And your name?”

“Daffney.”

“Mrs. Daffney, will you show me how to find the rest of the colored
people in this settlement?”

“Yas, sah. Go down here and cross yonder, and you’ll come to a big
field and some trees, sah.”

Before leaving Nashville, I put on my best. I knew, in case of any
difficulty, my clothes would be an important factor in obtaining
success. I went to an old colored man, plowing in that field,
opened my duster, showed him my nice coat and shirt-stud, at the
same time telling him, as fast as I could, whence I came, my
object in coming, and reading the Fisk catalogue to let him learn
something about the school.

He seemed satisfied with me. His countenance had changed from its
troubled appearance to a pleasant one. But for ten minutes we
argued the possibility of a cotton crop being made there if school
opened then. I made point after point, but could not convince
him, so put out after his wife. She was readily convinced of the
desirability of having school open immediately; she promised to
send three children, and to turn the old man.

I next encountered Jack Davis. “If you open school now, we’ll
starve next winter,” said he.

I tried to show him differently, but was unsuccessful. I asked him
for a drink. On reaching the house for it I explained my mission
to his wife, and obtained her consent to open the school, with her
promise to send two.

I next met a man who had no children to send. When I showed him
the picture of Fisk University (Jubilee Hall), he immediately
volunteered to work for me. He and I went and saw nearly every man
in the community before 9 o’clock that night.

The majority were against me, but I had resolved to open school
there and then. Time would not permit me to delay longer. The
next day (Sunday) I was given a Bible class to teach in the
Sunday-school. To my surprise, on going out doors I found that a
preliminary school meeting had been held under the trees and that
the Sunday-school teacher, though against me on coming there, had
changed and was marshalling his forces for the great meeting on the
morrow.

At 11 o’clock that same morning I heard a rousing blast by a
huntsman’s horn. On inquiring, I found that my childless friend was
telling the people to come together the next day. In the meantime,
Jack Davis came over and discussed the matter with me. He closed by
saying that I talked too fast for him, but that one thing was sure:
he would send no children.

I did a great deal of talking that Sunday; not willingly, but on
being introduced to the people as they came around to see me,
nothing was left but to discuss in full the question of opening.
It was an ox in the mire. Well, Monday came. The horn once more
resounded through the woods. The people gathered from far and
near. The chairman was elected, and, on stating the object of the
meeting, took occasion to show them the impracticability of opening
before the first of July. “There,” thought I, “whipped again. The
chair is against me.” I arose and spoke ten minutes. On taking my
seat, one opposed to me spoke. Among other things, he said: “Too
many rascals are out from school, anyhow.” Here one would rise
on my side; there one on the other side. Every man, including
myself, seemed to do his best to talk loud enough. The chairman
showed weakness in presiding, and was lacking in a knowledge of
parliamentary usage. Thought I, “here is my chance.” Every time
he blundered I arose and pointed out his error; showed him how to
appoint his committees, and instructed him as to what motions took
precedence. He saw my object, and informed me openly that he had
participated in conventions in Helena. “It makes no difference,”
said I; “you are wrong in your ruling.”

He began to look pitiful in the eyes of all. Men began to leave
the room. Soon one-half of them were on the outside. The tide was
turned. I went out to inquire more fully into matters. Nearly every
man was now for me. “Then, come in,” said I; “you can’t help me
out here.” I remained behind to see that all came. The previous
question, namely, to open the school on the first of June, was
called. All stood up in the affirmative except the man who had
seen the “rascals.” I had won through the chairman’s ignorance. I
have often thought of it since, and see more fully every day that
most battles are lost or won through incompetency on one side and
superiority on the other, and that knowledge is truly a power.

I will add that Jack Davis was my best friend after opening that
school, and Dick Brown, whom I met plowing on going from Aunt
Daffney’s house, carried my trunk a quarter of a mile for nothing,
and loaned me his watch while I taught there. On going away, the
man who was so afraid of the “rascals” came four miles to my house
and carried my trunk thirteen miles to Hope—all for nothing. The
crop turned out well. I gained twenty pounds, and, in a word, we
were all happy.




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


SPEECH OF AN INDIAN CHIEF.

  At a Fourth of July celebration held at Lidgerwood, Dakota, a
  novel feature of the exercises was a speech by Magayohi (Chief
  Star), in the Sioux dialect, which being translated reads as
  follows, and which shows that if all the Sioux Indians were as
  intelligent and as well disposed as this chief, the Government
  Commission would have little trouble.

“This land which lies about us was once the property of my people;
you have now possession of it and have made yourselves homes and
are rearing your families on the land which formerly belonged to
my forefathers. I have no complaint to make of this fact, for it
is perhaps better as it is. Our desire is to become like the white
man; to learn to cultivate the land and to make a living from it;
to learn to read and to write and to transact business; to learn
the principles of government and become citizens; to acquire title
to 160 acres for each member of our tribe. We have faith in the
Great Spirit and in the Great Father at Washington, and believe
that in time your people will teach my people to be like you; the
negro’s skin is darker than ours, and you have made a man of him;
we ask the Government to do us the same justice.”

       *       *       *       *       *


FORT YATES, DAKOTA.

FROM MISS M. C. COLLINS.

What are we going to do? This is a question coming to us
continually. The A. M. A. doubtless is in a happy mood and smiling
condition, now that it has strengthened our forces by two new
men—one, Rev. Mr. Cross, 300 miles below here, and one, Rev. Mr.
Reed, 32 miles from here at the Agency. It is a good thing—a great
deal better than not to have sent anyone. But now, think of it: An
Agency containing 6,000 souls, scattered in villages of from twenty
to fifty families in a village, and the settlements from five to
ten miles apart.

I could put a hundred Bibles in as many homes now among Catholics
and wholly heathen families where one, at least could read it who
has learned in some school of ours or the Presbyterians. I could
give out a thousand Dakota Primers, or First Readers, into as many
homes where they are anxious to read in their own tongue. There
is no law against a Dakota’s owning a Dakota Bible, nor reading a
Dakota primer in his own home. We could establish ten schools where
Sabbath services could be held, at once. We could so reach a great
many homes and hasten the civilization and Christianization of
these Indians by many years.

I go long distances into Catholic houses as well as others, to
administer to the sick. Last night I had a Government teacher (a
Catholic) and his sick wife, whom I have been treating, and their
two children, here all night. I have been riding sixteen miles to
treat her, and then riding home, the man always coming for me and
bringing me back.

I have now given twelve years to this work. I have seen wonderful
changes. I have seen men with painted faces and feathers following
the leader on to darkness and death. I have seen the same men,
clothed and in their right minds, stand before a heathen audience
of their own people and heard one say, only last week, “Men and
brethren, you know me as a man fierce in war—a man whose hands are
stained with blood—a man bearing many wounds. My body still bears
the marks, but Christ has made me whole. I am another man. My body
is the same, but my heart is new. My soul is clean; my will has
changed; I think differently. The Gospel has renewed me.” It was
one of the grandest pleas for the Gospel I ever heard. O! will you
not empty your gold and your silver into the treasury? Will you not
advance, and take every post as fast as ready to surrender? Let
us guard these people with a great army of the Lord. Send on the
advance guard and bring up your reinforcements. _I_ do not want to
fall till I see Dakota taken for the Lord!

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHRISTIAN CHINESE EN ROUTE TO CHINA.

It is some of the experiences of our Chinese brethren on their way
to their native land that I have in mind in this title—not the bare
fact that they do so return, or that their presence in their old
homes cannot but become a leavening and a gradually revolutionizing
influence there.

The subjoined letter is of special interest only because it is a
little more full in its statement than others relating to other
voyages. The writer, Ng Hing, was brought to faith in Christ at our
Barnes Mission, and the letter is addressed to his teacher, Mrs.
H. W. Lamont. Ng Hing is a modern Nathaniel. I scarcely ever spoke
with him during the first months of his discipleship to Christ,
but I felt like repeating that greeting which Jesus gave to the
first Nathaniel: “Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no
guile.” And I have found this impression abundantly confirmed by
the testimony of his brethren and my own closer acquaintanceship.

The letter is a little old, being dated Nov. 17th. When it was
first placed in my hands I asked the privilege of laying it before
the readers of the MISSIONARY, but it has been crowded out till
now. I give it with no attempt to set it right in its English.
It will be understood as it is, and will be read, I trust, with
all the more interest, revealing, as it does, the attempt of an
intelligent Chinese to wrestle with what must seem to him the
awkward idioms of our outlandish tongue:

  “_Dear Teacher_:

  “I am arrived here safely, Nov. 15th, Tuesday, at noon. I thank
  you and Miss Lilian [daughter of Mrs. Lamont, and, like her
  mother, one of our teachers] very much indeed for your lovely
  present and the letter which you given me. I used to read it
  very often because it is very improve to me, and that I know
  the Lord Jesus has opened my soul-eye and raised me from the
  death of sin to a life of righteousness. I will to tell all my
  countrymen what great thing Jesus has done for me, just as much
  as I can speak to.

  “Now I want to tell you about our journey. We have met fifteen
  missionary ladies and gentlemen. Some go to Japan and some to
  China. And several Chinese Christian brethren were there, and
  we have joined with the missionary to have service on every
  Sunday morning. I am very glad we have so pleasant opportunity
  on the ship—sing to praise God and spoke the gospel of Jesus.

  “But on the Oct. 26th we meet a great tempest; the waves run
  over the deck, and the wind against the ship, dreadful. That
  made the Chinese heathen complain and say many wicked words
  against us Christians; and they said to themselves, too: ‘We
  must not allow these Chinese Christians have the meeting on
  the ship because they tell us believe in Jesus and not worship
  the idol and image; therefore the evil spirits made the wind
  and the waves against the ship.’ Oh, I am very sorry for them,
  so foolish, when I heard that. For we trust in God and know
  he will take care of us, and even the tempest so great. God
  made it peaceful, and carry us all to get through safely—never
  drown. We should all thank God for his mercies and praise him
  so great and so powerful. But the heathen not mind God and do
  not care for their souls.

  “The missionary was very kindly to them and pity them so
  ignorant.

  “On the 6th of Nov. Mr. Chalfant read Acts 17:24-30, and I read
  it in Chinese and we try to explain it to them, but they were
  very proud, and not want to hear the Gospel of Jesus. They only
  crowd round us and make terrible noise, with revilings and
  indignity to us. That was to be fulfilled the words which Jesus
  had said to us Christians: ‘Ye shall be hated of all men for
  my name’s sake.’ Well, no matter what _they_ said; the Bible
  says: ‘Love your enemies and do kindly to them that hated you,’
  and we know God will be with us and help us in trouble, and
  even the heathen so persecuted us, but we do kindly to them
  and pray for them. Now please pray for me, for the temptation
  is great here; and pray for the missionary in China. * * * I
  do not forget all your kindness to me. Let God bless you and
  your family and all the scholars, and increase the number that
  believe in Jesus our Saviour. From Your scholar,

                                                     NG HING.”

I have room for a sentence or two from Chin Toy at Sacramento, in
a letter just received: “The tracts and small books were duly
received. I was very glad for them. I think will do much good to
our people. Street meetings here every Sunday. I give out some of
the tracts at the end of the preaching. All hearers seemed very
glad to come and get them. Each one say, ‘Give me a piece.’ I trust
the Lord will bless the seed still growing, which were sown on
these ground. This school is better lately. Had five or six new
scholars come last week. The Christian brethren are all well and
attend the meeting regularly.”

And here is a little of the “shady side” in another field: “I found
these three brethren here not quite love each other. They too much
complained each other’s faults. I felt very sorry for them. I think
every one of them is try to do right, but they are all impatient;
that is the trouble. I visited some stores in Chinatown; invited
men to come to school. Some men told me many scholars stayed away
because the Christian boys quarrel. So I thought better write you
that you will pray for them on that matter. I told them we must
love and forgive each other, hold fast together in the bond of
peace, and serve the Lord with the pure heart, then we will bring
forth fruit.”

Sound doctrine, to which many a company of American believers would
do well to take heed, though it comes from the pen of one who once
sat in darkness and worshipped idol-gods!

                                                      WM. C. POND.

       *       *       *       *       *




BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

MISS D. E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

       *       *       *       *       *


WOMAN’S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.

CO-OPERATING WITH THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

  ME.—Woman’s Aid to A. M. A., Chairman of Committee, Mrs. C. A.
  Woodbury, Woodfords, Me.

  VT.—Woman’s Aid to A. M. A., Chairman of Committee, Mrs. Henry
  Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury, Vt.

  VT.—Woman’s Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. Ellen Osgood,
  Montpelier, Vt.

  CONN.—Woman’s Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. S. M.
  Hotchkiss, 171 Capitol Ave., Hartford, Conn.

  N.Y.—Woman’s Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. William
  Spalding, Salmon Block, Syracuse, N.Y.

  ALA.—Woman’s Missionary Association, Secretary, Mrs. G. W.
  Andrews, Talladega, Ala.

  OHIO.—Woman’s Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. Flora K. Regal,
  Oberlin, Ohio.

  IND.—Woman’s Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C. H. Rogers,
  Michigan City, Ind.

  ILL.—Woman’s Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C. H. Taintor,
  151 Washington St., Chicago, Ill.

  MICH.—Woman’s Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. Mary B. Warren,
  Lansing, Mich.

  WIS.—Woman’s Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. C. Matter,
  Brodhead, Wis.

  MINN.—Woman’s Home Miss. Society, Secretary, Mrs. H. L. Chase,
  2,750 Second Ave., South, Minneapolis, Minn.

  IOWA.—Woman’s Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Miss Ella E. Marsh,
  Grinnell, Iowa.

  KANSAS.—Woman’s Home Miss. Society, Secretary, Mrs. Addison
  Blanchard, Topeka, Kan.

  NEB.—Woman’s Home Miss. Union, President, Mrs. F. H. Leavitt,
  1216 H St., Lincoln, Neb.

  SOUTH DAKOTA.—Woman’s Home Miss. Union, Secretary, Mrs. S. E.
  Young, Sioux Falls, Dak.


LETTER FROM SAN FRANCISCO.

_My Dear Miss Emerson_:

Having just returned from my class of Chinese children, my mother
thought, for the sake of variety, I might give an account of this
interesting though curious gathering. This class was formed about
three years ago. There was no Sabbath-school for Chinese children
at the time, and seeing the great need of one, and being unable to
attend to it on Sunday, I decided to have it on Friday afternoon,
at three o’clock.

About three-quarters of an hour before the time for commencing,
I start for the children, going from home to home, inviting and
coaxing them to come. I sometimes carry with me pieces of cake and
candy or a bright text-card to attract those who seem more timid
than the rest.

If I meet a stray child on the street, I say “Na lie dook she?”
(You come to school?) Sometimes my labors are rewarded by seeing
a bundle of clothes slip past me, and a minute afterward all is
lost in oblivion in a small alley; but sometimes they slip their
dirty hands into mine and trudge along with me, amid the jeers and
contemptuous smiles of those passing by. Finally we arrive at our
school room, between twenty and thirty children being present,
ranging all the way from five to twelve years. We commence by
singing three or four hymns; then all rise and repeat a prayer
after me in concert, sentence by sentence. I then explain the
Sabbath-school lesson through an interpreter, and either show the
picture of the International Lessons, or a black-board drawing, and
sometimes an object. I find, as with all children, their interest
can be awakened and held by means of an object or picture. After
letting each repeat the text given the week before, we close with
the Lord’s Prayer in Chinese; and after good-bye is said all
around, I dismiss them, taking some of them home, as their parents
are afraid to trust them across the car tracks alone.

These children are exceedingly bright and attentive, and as to
their good behavior, I can sometimes hold up their example as
worthy of the imitation of my class of American boys. Only to-day,
in speaking of the lesson on “Worshiping the Golden Calf,” I asked
which they worshiped, God or idols, and one little girl said, “Me
worship God; idols no good. They have eyes, no see; hands and
feet, and no walk.” And when I asked all to raise their hands who
would worship Jesus, she raised both hands. When shown the picture
of Abraham offering Isaac, one of them said, “Why did not he run
away?” One day, when taking home a little girl of five years of
age, she looked at the cable car which was passing, and said, “What
for does that car go faster than that one (pointing to a horse
car)? That has no horse.” They ask innumerable questions, and want
to know the why and wherefore of everything.

Oh! my dear Christian friends, pray for me, that I may be aided
in teaching and guiding these precious souls, on whom so much of
China’s progress depends.

                         Yours in Christ,

                                                 LILIAN LAMONT.




OUR YOUNG FOLKS.

       *       *       *       *       *


LITTLE INDIANS.

Perhaps there are little children in some of the beautiful homes
in the cities who cannot understand that the Indians are not all
born grown up, with feathers on their heads and tomahawks in their
hands. One little blue-eyed girl once said to me with a very long
O-o-o-o and her hand over her mouth, “Oh, o-h! I did not know there
were little Indian boys and girls!” but let me tell you, little
Golden Hair, there are Indian boys and girls.

They have some very funny names, too. But there is one thing
pleasant about it; their names are given to them because they mean
something. As I write this article, I look out from my window and
see an Indian boy with a roughly-made sled drawing his little
sister up the hill so that she can slide down again behind him.
Little Indians are not wholly unlike little white boys and girls.
They eat and sleep, laugh and cry, but they do not fight. That
comes with civilization.

I can from my window watch the boys and girls playing on the
hillside every day as long as the snow lasts, and I never have
heard a child cry nor have I seen one child hurt another. I can
hear them laugh and shout and cheer when one tumbles off the sled,
but no angry or bad words are ever used. They are very merry and
happy when we remember that there is no Indian child that does not
know what it is to be hungry and have the mother say there is no
food.

When a little baby comes into an Indian home, he is wrapped up in
a blanket and it is tied all about him so that he cannot use his
arms or legs, and he looks very much like a rag doll, but he cries
and laughs just like a real flesh and blood and bones baby. But,
little Golden Hair, let me whisper to you one secret of the Indian
baby’s happy life: he never gets _spanked_! They leave that to the
uncivilized white mother. So, after all, the white boy does not
have all the good in life; does he? Only think of sliding down hill
a whole morning without even a board between the smooth snow and
the trousers, going home with wet and worn clothes and not getting
whipped; not even sent to bed!

Indian children are never punished; but, after all, they are not
bad. The boys like to hunt the snowbirds with bows and arrows. They
kill a great many too. The little girls play with corn-cob dolls
and little tents and travois, or _toshoes_, as they call them,
sometimes drawn by dogs.

The Indian children have hard lives after all. They cannot live to
grow up unless they are pretty strong. A great many little ones
die for want of good, wholesome food, and many for want of fresh
air and warm clothes. We want all the little boys and girls in
Christian homes to remember the little Dakotas. There is much good
in them; and if they had the advantages you have, perhaps they
would be fully as well behaved, and as true and faithful to God, as
are you. Will you help us to save the little Indians?

                                                MARY C. COLLINS.

       *       *       *       *       *


LITTLE INDIAN CHILDREN IN THE BIRDS’ NEST AT SANTEE AGENCY, NEB.

They are such happy little girls, and so easily entertained. Just
now I saw two of them getting such a merry time out of dragging the
bowl of a large pewter spoon over the ground for a wagon, putting
a little stick in the way to represent water they had to cross—for
our recent rains have flooded the bottom-lands in several places.
There was a nail lying in the spoon, and I asked what that meant.
“Oh,” Maggie said, “that is me, and I am going to the store to buy
some beads.” A shorter nail was there to represent her younger
playmate. No little girls to-day, pushing their red-cheeked wax
dollies in their miniature baby carriages, are any happier than
our little Indian girls, drawing their broken pewter spoon and
representing themselves by old rusty nails.

At our Missionary Society, which meets every Saturday for an hour,
I generally read them a little story; sometimes from “The Pansy,”
which was sent us last year, or from “Our Little Men and Women,”
also a gift from an unknown friend. They enjoy it always and like
to see the pictures; but the book that holds the charm, and of
which they never tire, is “The Story of the Bible.”

They have pieced two small quilts and one large one this season,
and will finish two others of medium size. Our mite box contains
$2.50 at this date. These are the pennies that their parents send
them to be used in this way, and occasionally they earn one by some
little service for us.

                                             HARRIET B. ILSLEY.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR JULY, 1888.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $1,281.94.

    Bangor. Hammond St. Ch.                                  $75.75
    Bangor. J.H. Crosby, _for Atlanta U._                      5.00
    Bethel. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch.                     12.50
    Blanchard. Mrs. Rose B. Packard, deceased, by
      J. C. B. Packard                                         5.00
    Brunswick. Mrs. S. F. C. Hammond, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        25.00
    Castine. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                   5.00
    Castine. Class No. 9, Trin. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                                1.25
    Eastport. Sab. Ch. of Central Cong. Ch.                    5.00
    Falmouth. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        23.50
    Gorham. Miss E. B. Emery, _for Atlanta U._                25.00
    Hallowell. Mrs. H. K. Baker                                5.00
    Hampden. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.79
    North Yarmouth. Rev. J. B. Carruthers, 5;
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., 4                                    9.00
    Portland. State St. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 150;
      Williston Ch., 84; Rev. F. T. Bayley, 25               259.00
    Saco. First Parish Ch.                                    21.68
    Skowhegan. Island Av. Cong. Ch.                           12.65
    South Waterford. Miss M. E. Shurtleff                     10.00
    Wells. B. Maxwell, 20; First Cong. Ch. and
      Soc., 10.25                                             30.25
    ——. “Friend in Maine,” _for Williamsburg, Ky._            10.00
    Woman’s Aid to A. M. A., by Mrs. C. A.
      Woodbury, Treas., _for Woman’s Work_.
        Albany. Mrs. H. G. Lovejoy                     3.00
        Albany. Mrs. A. K. Cummings                    3.00
        Auburn. High St.                              25.00
        Auburn. Sixth St.                              5.00
        Bethel. First Ch.                             14.00
        Bethel. Second Ch.                            12.00
        Bethel. Sec. Ch., Little Helpers               3.00
        Brunswick.                                    72.00
        Berlin. (N.H.)                                10.00
        Calais.                                       10.00
        Cape Elizabeth. Star Mission Circle            3.60
        Cumberland Center.                            20.00
        Dennysville.                                   6.50
        Dennysville. Dea. E. P. Vose                   5.00
        Dover and Foxcroft. Ch.                       17.00
        East Baldwin.                                 10.00
        East Machias.                                  4.00
        Freeport.                                     22.00
        Freeport, South.                              42.35
        Gilead.                                        1.00
        Gray.                                          6.50
        Harpswell Center.                             10.00
        Harrison.                                      6.00
        Jonesboro.                                     1.00
        Jonesport.                                     2.00
        Lewiston. Pine St.                            27.00
        Machias.                                      20.00
        Machiasport.                                   8.75
        Marshfield.                                    2.00
        Mechanic Falls.                               13.50
        Minot Center.                                 18.00
        New Gloucester.                               26.50
        North Yarmouth.                                4.00
        Oxford.                                        2.50
        Phippsburg.                                    5.23
        Portland. High St. Ch.                        75.00
        Portland. State St. Ch.                       50.00
        Portland. Second Parish Ch.                   40.00
        Pownal.                                        3.10
        Red Beach.                                     1.00
        Shelburne. (N.H.)                              2.00
        South Bridgton.                                5.25
        Steuben.                                       5.00
        Sweden.                                        2.00
        Turner.                                       15.00
        Upton.                                         2.25
        West Auburn.                                   3.05
        West Minot and Hebron.                         6.50
        Whiting.                                       1.75
        Yarmouth. First Parish.                       48.60
                                                     ——————  701.93
    Received by Mrs. J.P. Hubbard, _for
      Williamsburg, Ky._
        Hiram. Mrs. Z.W. Banks, _for Student
              Aid_                                     1.00
        North Yarmouth. Mrs. J.B. Carruthers,
              _for Student Aid_                       11.14
        Portland. Mrs. Nathan Dane, _for
              Student Aid_                             5.00
        Woodfords. S. S. Class, by Miss W.
              Perry, _for Student Aid_                 4.00
        Bethel. Mrs. D. W. Hardy, _for
              Freight_                                 3.00
        Biddeford. Mrs. J. W. Haley, _for
              Freight_                                 1.00
        Farmington Falls. Miss S. G.
              Croswell, _for Freight_                  2.00
        Litchfield Corner. Mrs. J. T. Hawes,
              _for Freight_                            1.00
        South Freeport. Miss H. H. Ilsley,
              _for Freight_                            4.50
        West Falmouth. Rev. W. H. Haskell,
              _for Freight_                            1.00
                                                     ——————   33.64
    Clothing, etc., received by Mrs. J. P.
      Hubbard, _for Williamsburg, Ky._:
        Auburn. Bbl., by Mrs. F.S. Root
        Bethel. Bbl., by Mrs. D. W. Hardy
        Biddeford. Bbl., by Mrs. J. W. Haley
        Falmouth. Bbl., by Mrs. Geo. O. Knight
        Farmington Falls. Miss Susan G. Croswell, Box
          of Hats
        Litchfield Corner. Bbl., by Mrs. J. T. Hawes
        North Yarmouth. Bbl., by Mrs. J. B. Carruthers
        Phillips. Bbl., by Miss Cornelia T. Crosby
        Portland. Bbl., by Mrs. Chas. Frost
        South Freeport. Bbl., by Miss H. H. Ilsley
        West Falmouth. One and one-half Bbls., by Rev.
          W. H. Haskell
        Woodfords. Half-Bbl., by Miss W. Perry
        Unknown Source. Bbl.


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $574.18.

    Exeter. Mary E. Shute                                     50.00
    Gilsum. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 7.50
    Great Falls. First Cong. Ch.                              30.00
    Lebanon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               50.00
    Lyme. G. W. Randlett, _for Mountain White Work_            2.00
    Manchester. Hanover St. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                32.13
    Nashua. Ladies Miss’y Soc., by Dora N.
      Spaulding, _for Woman’s Work_                           20.00
    Nashua. Betsy A. Wilson, _for Negroes, Indians
      and Chinese_ and to const. ANNA M. WILSON,
      CARRIE FAY, MRS. JEFFERSON DEAN, NETTIE A.
      WILSON, IRA B. WILSON, ADDIE L. WILSON, ETTA
      A. WILSON and MRS. NELLIA A. MORRIS L. M’s.            300.00
    Penacook. Rev. A. Wm. Fiske, _for Chinese M._              5.00
    Piermont. “A Friend”                                       5.00
    Walpole. First Cong. Ch.                                  23.25
                                                             ——————
                                                            $524.88

    ESTATES.

    Portsmouth. Estate of Mrs. E. A. Brooks, by H.
      A. Yeaton, Ex.                                          25.00
    Cornish. Estate of Sarah W. Westgate, by
      Albert E. Wellman, for Trustees Cong. Ch. of
      Cornish                                                 24.30
                                                             ——————
                                                            $574.18


  VERMONT, $593.70.

    Barre. Cong. Ch.                                          17.08
    Castleton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Indian
      M._                                                     25.00
    Chelsea. Ladies, by Mrs. Ellen D. Wild, _for
      McIntosh, Ga._                                          10.00
    Danville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                          10.00
    Franklin. Ladies, by Mrs. Henry Fairbanks,
      _for McIntosh, Ga._                                      2.65
    Greensboro. Rev. S. Knowlton                              20.00
    Manchester. Miss Ellen Hawley, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      70.00
    New Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             19.00
    North Craftsbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      11.60
    Norwich. Mrs. H. Burton                                    2.00
    Quechee. Cong. Sab. Sch., Box of Books, _for
      Talladega C._
    Peacham. Ladies of Cong. Ch., by Mrs. C. A.
      Bunker, _for McIntosh, Ga._                             26.00
    Royalton. A. W. Kenney. 30, to const. SEYMOUR
      CULVER L.M., Cong. Ch. and Soc., 20.02                  50.02
    Saint Johnsbury. Ladies, by Mrs. Henry
      Fairbanks, _for McIntosh, Ga._                          91.00
    Saint Johnsbury. Ladies, ad’l _for McIntosh,
      Ga._                                                    55.00
    South Royalton. Mrs. Susan H. Jones                       10.00
    Thetford. First Cong. Ch.                                  7.00
    Vergennes. Miss Minnie Wood                                2.00
    West Brattleboro. Cong. Ch.                                9.24
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            136.11
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Vt., _for
      McIntosh, Ga._, by Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks,
      Treas.:
        Manchester. L. H. M. S.                        5.00
                                                       ————    5.00
                                                             ——————
                                                            $578.70

    ESTATE.

    Wilmington. Estate of Mary Ray, by E. M.
      Haynes, Ex.                                             15.00
                                                             ——————
                                                            $593.70


  MASSACHUSETTS, $7,726.29.

    Abington. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   20.00
    Adams. “Memorial Band” Box of C., Val. 10,
      _for Tougaloo U._
    Amherst. First Cong. Ch., 40; South Cong. Ch.,
      6.67                                                    46.67
    Andover. Mrs. Phebe A. Chandler, _for
      Lexington, Ky._                                       2000.00
    Andover. Primary Dep’t Sab. Sch. of So. Ch.,
      Birthday Boxes                                           1.62
    Ashland. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                          25.00
    Auburndale. Cong. Ch., _for Atlanta U._                   17.11
    Auburndale. Rev. Horace Dutton and “Other
      Friends,” Prouty Job Printing Press, _for
      Atlanta U._
    Ayer. First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                    12.52
        Boston. Union Ch.                            225.58
        Boston. Miss Julia S. Bartlett, 100;
                Old So. Ch. Sab. Sch., 35;
                Berkeley Temple Sab. Sch.,
                31.83; _for Student Aid,
                Atlanta U._ Miss Mary L.
                Thompson, 5; Chas. F. Atkinson,
                Box of Books; Horace P.
                Chandler, Box of Books; _for
                Atlanta U._                          171.83
        Boston. “Union Workers of Union Ch.”
                _for Indian M._                        5.00
        Boston. Mrs. Jacob Fullarton, _for
                Prof. Lawrence, Jellico, Tenn._        1.00
        Dorchester. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.
                    (10 of which _for Indian M._)    148.29
        Dorchester. Harvard Ch.                        1.00
        Roxbury. Immanuel Cong. Ch.                  105.93
        Roxbury. “King’s Daughters,” Highland Cong.
                 Ch., Box of C., _for Tougaloo U._
        West Roxbury. South Evan. Ch. and Soc.        22.14
                                                      —————  680.77
    Barre. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                              8.51
    Beverly. Dane St. Ch. and Soc.                           187.80
    Beverly. Sab. Sch. of Dane St. Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                16.00
    Boxboro. Primary Class Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Rosebud Indian M._                                       2.00
    Brimfield. Mrs. P. C. Browning, 10; Mrs. J. S.
      Webber, 1; First Cong. Ch., 6.80                        17.80
    Brookline. Harvard Ch.                                    74.13
    Chesterfield. Cong. Ch.                                    5.00
    Coleraine. Cong. Ch.                                       7.00
    Concord. “A”                                              10.00
    Clinton. W. M. Soc., _for Talladega C._                   30.00
    Cambridge. North Av. Ch. and Soc.                        150.31
    Cambridgeport. Ladies of Pilgrim Ch., Box of
      C., _for Tougaloo U._
    Chelsea. First Cong Ch.                                   30.00
    Chester. Sab. Sch. Second Cong. Ch., _for
      Jellico, Tenn._                                         15.00
    Danvers. Maple St. Cong. Sab. Sch., 28.39;
      Bible Class Maple St. Cong. Sab. Sch., 6.50;
      _for Atlanta U._                                        34.89
    East Billerica. Mrs. A. R. Richardson, from
      her little children’s Mite Box, _for
      Mountain White Work_                                     5.00
    East Cambridge. Miss Mary F. Aikin, _for
      Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                    5.00
    East Taunton. Cong Ch.                                     2.00
    Everett. Cong. Ch.                                        17.19
    Fall River. Third Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._              10.57
    Falmouth. First Ch., M. C. Coll.                          14.25
    Georgetown. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for
      Atlanta U._                                             10.00
    Gloucester. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      50.00
    Haverhill. North Cong. Ch. and Soc., 200;
      Centre Cong. Ch. and Soc., 100                         300.00
    Haydenville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           14.15
    Holden. Cong. Ch.                                         25.00
    Holliston. Cong. Sab. Sch. Primary Class, 6;
      Class of Young Men, 5.50; Class of Boys,
      2.30; _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                   13.80
    Hubbardston. “Ladies,” _for Tougaloo U._, 20;
      Cong. Ch., 10                                           30.00
    Hyde Park. Woman’s H. M. Union, _for Freight_              9.00
    Ipswich. First Ch. and Soc.                               20.00
    Lenox. Cong. Ch.                                          21.75
    Lexington. Hancock Ch.                                    35.00
    Littleton. Cong. Ch.                                      19.00
    Lowell. “The Cent. Soc. of Eliot Ch.”                     30.00
    Malden. First Ch.                                         48.15
    Malden. Mrs. Dr. Wadsworth, Bbl., Children’s
      Books, Toys, etc., _for Williamsburg, Ky._
    Maynard. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               81.00
    Medway. Village Ch.                                       60.00
    Melrose. Miss S. J. Elder                                  3.06
    Monterey. Cong. Ch.                                       18.00
    New Bedford. Mrs. M. L. F. Bartlett                       30.00
    Newton. Eliot Ch.                                        100.00
    Newton Centre. Maria B. Furber Miss’y Soc.,
      _for Atlanta U._                                       105.50
    Newton Center. First Cong. Ch.                            64.09
    Newton Highlands. Cong. Ch. (25 of which _for
      Tougaloo U._)                                          104.22
    Newtonville. Central Cong. Ch.                            98.59
    Northampton. A. L. Williston                             300.00
    Northboro. Mrs. M. D. Wells                                5.00
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch., to const.
      REV. CHARLES S. MILLS, ROSELLA H. WHITING
      and EDWARD L. HAVENS L. M’s                            100.00
    North Brookfield. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., First
      Ch., _for Freight_                                       2.00
    North Middleboro. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      27.43
    Orange. Central Evan. Cong. Ch.                            9.11
    Otis. “A Friend”                                           6.00
    Oxford. First Cong. Ch.                                   51.00
    Paxton. Mrs. Rev. A. Morton, Bbl. of C., _for
      Tougaloo U._
    Pepperell. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Atlanta
      U._                                                     20.00
    Pittsfield. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                10.00
    Quincy. Evan. Cong. Ch.                                   72.00
    Reading. Cong. Ch., “Special”                              2.00
    Richmond. Cong. Ch.                                        6.84
    Sheffield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              7.00
    Shelburne Falls. A. M. Aids, add’l                         0.10
    South Deerfield. “L. S. C.”                                3.00
    South Framingham. South Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                50.00
    South Framingham. R. L. Day, 25; “Friend,”
      50c., _for Mountain Work_                               25.50
    Spencer. Cong. Ch., one 1,570 lbs. McShane
      Bell. val. 504.43; cash for expenses, 97.63,
      _for Atlanta U._                                        97.63
    Springfield. Y. P. S. C. E., Hope Cong. Ch.,
      _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                              12.50
    Springfield. Home Miss’y Circle, Box of C.,
      Val. 34.95, _for Tougaloo U._
    Taunton. Union Ch.                                        15.89
    Templeton. Trin. Ch. and Soc.                             18.35
    Ware. H. B. Anderson’s Sab. Sch. Class, _for
      Indian M._                                              35.00
    Wakefield. Cong. Ch.                                      48.97
    Waltham. Trin. Cong. Soc.                                 23.03
    Waverly. Mrs. Daniel Butler, _for Mountain
      Work_                                                   10.00
    West Hampton. “A Friend”                                   5.00
    West Medway. Sab. Sch., of Second Cong. Ch.               13.32
    Westminster. Cong. Ch. and Soc., ad’l                     10.00
    West Somerville. Young Men of Day St. Ch.,
      _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                              25.00
    West Springfield. Ladies’ Mission Circle of
      Park St. Ch., _for Tougaloo U._                        100.00
    West Springfield. Sab. Sch. of Park St. Ch.
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           43.42
    West Springfield. Mrs. Aaron Bagg’s S. S.
      Class, _for Indian M._                                   5.00
    West Springfield. Ladies’ Mission Circle of
      Park St. Ch., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                 5.00
    West Yarmouth. Cong. Ch.                                   5.38
    Whately. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch. to const.
      MRS. SARAH J. WELLS L. M.                               31.00
    Williamsburg. MRS. SOPHIA K. NASH, to const.
      herself L. M.                                           30.00
    Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                             21.57
    Winchendon. North Cong. Ch., a’dl                          2.50
    Winthrop. “Friends”                                        0.80
    Worcester. Plymouth Cong. Ch. 210.84; Piedmont
      Ch., qr. 143.75; Family of Hiram Smith,
      deceased, by Mary A. and Joanna F. Smith,
      50; Park Cong. Ch., 5; Mrs. S. A. Howard, 5            414.59
    Worcester. Piedmont Sab. Sch., _for Ch.,
      Petty, Tex._                                           100.00
    Worcester. Mrs. Whittemore, _for Mountain Work_            2.00
    Worcester. Logan, Swift and Brigham, Case
      Envelopes; Whitcomb Envelope Co., Case
      Envelopes, _for Atlanta U._
    Worcester. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. Central Ch.,
      Bbl. of C., _for Tougaloo U._
    ——. “Cash”                                               100.00
    ——. “A Friend” _for Rev. G. W. Lawrence_                   5.00
    Hampden Benevolent Association, by Charles
      Marsh. Treas.:
        Chicopee. Second                              38.05
        Feeding Hills.                                21.13
        Holyoke. First                                23.27
        Huntington. Second                            21.10
        Long Meadow. Ladies’ Ben. Ass’n.              15.35
        Long Meadow. Gentlemen’s Benev. Ass’n.        26.23
        Monson. Sab. Sch.                             50.00
        Palmer. Second                               100.00
        South Hadley Falls                            14.00
        Springfield. First                            20.00
        Springfield. North                            44.32
        Springfield. South                            67.37
        Springfield. Memorial                         31.47
        Westfield. Second                             14.46
        West Springfield. First Ch.                   35.00
        West Springfield. Sab. Sch. First Ch.         20.00
        West Springfield. Park St., _for
              Indian M._                              52.91
        West Springfield. Park St.                     5.00
        Wilbraham.                                    12.25
                                                      —————  611.91
                                                            ———————
                                                          $7,226.29

    ESTATE.

    Cambridge. Estate of A. E. Hildreth, by
      Trustees, _for Freedmen_                               500.00
                                                            ———————
                                                          $7,726.29


  RHODE ISLAND, $297.10.

    Central Falls. Cong. Ch.                                  31.10
    Little Compton. United Cong. Ch.                          16.00
    Peace Dale. Rowland G. Hazard, _for Atlanta U._          250.00


  CONNECTICUT, $2,395.14.

    Bethel. “Willing Workers,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Bolton. By Rev. L. H. Barber                              12.50
    Bristol. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Tougaloo
      U._                                                     50.00
    Bristol. Mrs. Lewis, _for Williamsburg, Ky._               2.00
    Bridgeport. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch., to
      const. CHESTER W. BENNETT L. M.                         50.00
    Canaan. ——                                                 2.00
    Center Brook. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Conn.
      Ind’l Sch., Ga._                                        25.00
    Central Village. “A Friend,” _for Conn. Ind’l
      Sch., Ga._                                               1.00
    Cornwall. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                          22.32
    Cromwell. Ladies of Cong. Ch., by Miss M. G.
      Savage, _for Conn. Ind’l Sch., Ga._                     19.00
    Danielsonville. Westfield Cong. Ch. and Soc.              30.37
    East Avon. Cong. Ch.                                      16.00
    East Hartford. First Ch.                                  40.00
    Fairfield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Indian
      Sch’p._                                                 50.00
    Farmington. Cong. Ch. (200 of which from Henry
      D. Hawley, to const. ROBERT K. HOWE and JOHN
      LEON WEBSTER L. M’s)                                   317.63
    Glastonbury. Miss A. M. Goodrich                          60.00
    Goshen. Cong. Ch.                                         28.86
    Greenfield Hill. Cong. Ch.                                12.19
    Guilford. ——                                             100.00
    Hadlyme. R. E. Hungerford, 100; Jos. W.
      Hungerford, 100                                        200.00
    Kensington. Cong. Ch., bal. to const. MRS.
      MARY P. QUILL L. M.                                      4.25
    Lebanon. First Ch.                                        32.38
    Mansfield Center. Cong. Ch.                               16.60
    Marlboro. Cong. Ch.                                       16.37
    New Haven. Howard Av. Ch.                                 26.96
    New London. First Cong. Ch.                               54.93
    Norwich. Park Cong. Ch., _for Atlanta U._                200.00
    Norwichtown. “*, First Cong. Ch.”                         24.00
    Plantsville. “Tougaloo Mission Quintet,” _for
      Tougaloo U._                                            11.66
    Plymouth. Geo. Langdon                                    50.00
    Putnam. Second Cong. Ch.                                  35.38
    Redding. “A Friend,” _for Mountain Work_                  10.00
    Rockville. Second Cong. Ch.                               29.65
    Simsbury. Cong. Ch.                                       33.17
    South Britain. Cong. Ch.                                   9.89
    Southington. First Cong. Ch.                              36.64
    Taftville. First Cong. Ch.                                15.00
    Terryville. Cong. Ch., 45: Elizur Fenn, 5;
      Mrs. Elizur Fenn, 5                                     55.00
    Tolland. Cong. Ch.                                        10.25
    Wallingford. H. L. Judd, _for Sch’p, Tougaloo
      U._                                                     70.00
    Wallingford. Cong. Ch.                                    66.84
    West Hartford. Anson Chappell                             10.00
    Westminster. Mrs. S. B. Carter, _for
      Thomasville, Ga._                                        5.00
    Westport. Saugatuck Cong. Soc.                            24.76
    West Winsted. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                  134.32
    Wilton. Cong. Ch.                                         10.00
    Woodstock. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       24.22
    Woodstock. Sab. Sch. and Ladies of Cong. Ch.,
      _for Thomasville, Ga._                                  16.50
    ——. “A Friend in Conn.”                                  100.00
    ——. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._             17.50
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Conn., by
      Mrs. S. M. Hotchkiss, Sec.:
        Bridgeport. Ladies’ Social Circle of
              South Ch., _for Conn. Ind’l
              Sch., Ga._                              35.00
        Chaplin. Ladies’ Soc., _for Conn.
              Ind’l Sch., Ga._                        15.00
        Enfield. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., _for
              Woman’s Work_                           35.00
        Pomfret. Ladies’ Soc., _for Conn.
              Ind’l Sch., Ga._                        20.00
        Hartford. Sab. Sch. of First Ch.,
              _for Ind’l Work, Williamsburg,
              Ky._                                    50.00
        Wallingford. W. H. M. U., _for Ind’l
              Work, Williamsburg, Ky._                25.00
                                                      —————  180.00


  NEW YORK, $2,270.42.

    Brooklyn. Plymouth Ch.                                  1164.15
    Brooklyn. “A Life Member,” to const. MISS
      ISABEL SHIRLEY L. M.                                    30.00
    Brooklyn. S. Ballard, _for Tougaloo, Miss._              250.00
    Brooklyn. Woman’s Miss’y Soc. of Lewis Ave.
      Cong. Ch., _for Woman’s Work_                           13.40
    East Beekmantown. John S. Kirby                           10.00
    East Bloomfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       41.67
    Fillmore. L. L. Nourse                                     5.00
    Hopkinton. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00
    Jamestown. Rev. W. D. Henry                               10.00
    Jefferson. Mrs. Susannah Ruliffson                         2.50
    Little Valley. First Cong. Ch.                             4.00
    Lowville. Mrs. Lydia C. Hough                             20.00
    Middletown. Samuel Ayers                                   5.00
    New York. S. T. Gordon, 100; F. P. Shumway,
      1.50                                                   101.50
    New York. Morris K. Jesup, _for Atlanta U._              200.00
    Norwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               39.60
    Oswego. Cong. Ch.                                        140.04
    Perry Center. Mrs. M. G. Richardson, “in
      Memory of Rev. J. C. Richardson”                         2.00
    Poughkeepsie. Cong. Ch., 26.54; First Reformed
      Ch., 21.92                                              48.46
    Rensselaer Falls. Cong. Ch.                                5.10
    Spencerport. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., to
      const. Miss LOTTA M. SPENCER, L. M.                     33.00
    Tremont. “A Friend”                                       10.00
    ——. “A Country Friend”                                   100.00
    ——. “A Friend in Essex Co.”                               25.00


  NEW JERSEY, $46.00.

    Arlington. Mrs. G. Overacre                                1.00
    Westfield. “Mission Band,” by Miss M. C.
      Alpers, _for Santee Indian M._                          45.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $30.00.

    Cowdersport. Mrs. M. W. Mann                               5.00
    Pittsburg. First Cong. Ch.                                10.00
    Ridgway. Young People’s Bible Class, by Minnie
      Kline, _for Oaks, N.C._                                  5.00
    Washington. Mrs. Mary H. McFarland                        10.00


  OHIO, $325.22.

    Ashland. Mrs. E. Thomson                                   2.28
    Bellevue. S. W. Boise                                    100.00
    Brownhelm. C. H. Perry                                    10.00
    Cincinnati. Central Cong. Ch.                             81.15
    Cleveland. “Harry, Bert and Others,” Jennings
      Av. Cong. Ch., _for Ponies_                              2.15
    Cuyahoga Falls. Cong. Ch.                                  5.03
    Edinburg. B. E. Bingham and “Friends,” _for
      Indian M._                                              10.00
    Garrettsville. Cong. Ch., 8, and 1.21 from
      “the Children”                                           9.21
    Huntsburg. A. E. Millard and Mrs. M. E. Millard           15.00
    Lodi. Cong. Ch., 7.85; Ladies’ A. M. A., 2.25             10.10
    Medina. Sab. Sch. Class, by Miss May Woodward              1.00
    Oberlin. First Ch.                                        54.30
    Salem. David A. Allen (5 of which bal. to
      const. REV. DE COSTA POMERENE L. M.)                    25.00


  ILLINOIS, $1,567.36.

    Aurora. First Cong. Ch.                                    8.78
    Bartlett. Cong. Ch.                                       20.75
    Bunker Hill. Cong. Ch.                                    15.00
    Chicago. “Friends in New England Ch.,” _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                60.00
    Delavan. R. Hoghton                                       10.00
    Downers Grove. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Sch’p
      Fund, Fisk U._                                           9.00
    Dundee. Mrs. A. M. Rover, _for Dakota Indian
      M._                                                      6.00
    Evanston. Cong. Ch., to const. HARLOW B. HILL
      and A. D. SANDERS L. M’s                                86.87
    Glencoe. Ch. of Christ                                    28.67
    Granville. “A Friend”                                     25.00
    Hennepin. Cong. Ch.                                       15.00
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch.                                       25.00
    Hinsdale. Y. L. Miss’y Soc., _for Sch’p Fund,
      Fisk U._                                                20.00
    Jacksonville. First Cong. Ch.                             47.60
    Lockport. First Cong. Ch.                                  4.65
    Lyndon. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Millburn. Cong. Ch.                                        8.74
    Millington. Mrs. D. W. Jackson, _for Indian M._            5.00
    Moline. Juv. Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for Atlanta U._           7.86
    Oak Park. Y. L. Miss’y Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                50.00
    Ottawa. Cong. Ch.                                         22.78
    Paxton. Mrs. J. B. Shaw, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             10.00
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                                       12.24
    Providence. Cong. Ch.                                      8.45
    Ridge Prairie. Rev. Andrew Kern                            3.00
    Sheffield. Cong. Ch.                                      20.00
    Streator. Cong. Ch.                                        5.67
    Udina. Cong. Ch.                                           5.30
    Woodburn. Cong. Ch.                                       11.00
    Illinois Woman’s Home Missionary Union, _for
      Woman’s Work_, by
        Mrs. C. E. Maltby, Treas.: Ill. W. H. M. U.   10.00
                                                      —————   10.00
                                                             ——————
                                                            $567.36

    ESTATE.

    Chicago. Estate of Philo Carpenter, by
      Executors                                            1,000.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $1,567.36


  MICHIGAN, $178.42.

    Cheboygan. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Indian
      M._                                                      1.30
    Cedar Springs. Rev. E. C. Herrington                       5.00
    Detroit. Fort Wayne Cong. Ch.                              5.06
    Grand Blanc. Cong. Ch.                                    13.25
    Hancock. W. M. Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Hudson. Cong. Ch.                                         12.65
    Imlay City. First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._               1.75
    Michigan Centre. Cong. Ch.                                 3.20
    Middleville. Cong. Ch.                                     2.26
    Pleasanton. Cong. Ch.                                      2.00
    Saint Joseph. Cong. Ch.                                   27.45
    White Lake. Robert Garner                                 10.00
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Mich., _for
      Woman’s Work_, by Mrs. E. F. Grabill, Treas.:
        Covert. L. M. S.                              10.00
        Detroit. Ladies’ Union of First Cong.
              Ch.                                     50.00
        Grand Blanc. “Willing Workers”                 9.50
                                                      —————   69.50


  WISCONSIN, $417.53.

    Beloit. “L. M.,” Second Cong. Ch.                          5.00
    Bloomer. First Cong. Ch.                                   3.54
    Delavan. Chas. T. Smith                                  100.00
    Evansville. Cong. Ch.                                     20.25
    Janesville. First Cong. Ch.                               50.00
    La Crosse. First Cong. Ch.                                43.43
    Lake Geneva. First Cong. Ch.                              10.00
    Madison. First Cong. Ch.                                  10.42
    Menominee. Cong. Ch.                                      14.56
    Muckwanago. Cong. Ch.                                      2.13
    Watertown. Cong. Ch.                                       6.20
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Wis., _for
      Woman’s Work_:
        Appleton. W. H. M. S.                          8.25
        Baraboo. Mrs. Dea. Clark                       1.50
        Beloit. First Ch., W. M. S., to const.
          MRS. LYDIA S. H. HAMLIN L. M.               30.60
        Berlin. W. H. M. S.                            5.00
        Black Earth. Dr. Stoddart                      2.00
        Boscobel. W. H. M. S.                          5.00
        Brodhead. Misses E. and J. Sherman             5.00
        Clinton. W. H. M. S.                           4.25
        Eau Claire. W. H. M. S.                       13.30
        Fond du Lac. W. H. M. S.                      10.00
        Lake Geneva. Ladies’ Aid Soc.                 12.85
        Mauston. Mrs. C. W. Barney                     5.00
        Milton Junction. Misses Chapman                1.25
        Milwaukee. Pilgrim Ch., W. H. M. S.           15.00
        Rosendale. L. H. M. S.                         5.00
        Sun Prairie. Mrs. Buel                         1.00
        Waukesha. Y. P. S. C. E.                      10.00
        Wauwatosa. W. H. M. S.                         7.00
        Windsor. W. H. M. S.                          10.00
                                                      —————  152.00


  IOWA, $161.81.

    Algona. A. Zahlten                                        12.00
    Anamosa. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 21.48; Sab. Sch.,
      4.52                                                    26.00
    Cedar Rapids. “Busy Bees,” Sab. Sch. First
      Cong. Ch.                                                2.00
    Creston. Cong. Ch.                                         1.70
    Des Moines. Mrs. J. F. Rollins, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                       3.00
    Larchwood. Cong. Ch.                                       1.00
    Manchester. Cong. Ch.                                     20.00
    McGregor. Y. P. Mission Band of Cong. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Straight U._                          12.50
    Osage. Cong. Ch., ad’l to const. MISS ANNETTE
      H. WHITNEY and MISS STELLA LULA FAY L. M.’s             57.84
    Reinbeck. Cong. Ch.                                       24.77
    Waterloo. Mrs. M. B. Forry, _for Talladega C._             1.00


  MINNESOTA, $541.33.

    Clearwater. Cong. Sab. Sch. of Fish Creek                  6.25
    Elk River. Union Ch.                                       6.83
    Faribault. Cong. Ch.                                      32.40
    Granite Falls. Cong. Ch.                                   1.58
    Northfield. “Willing Workers,” by Gertrude
      Scriver                                                 22.50
    Rushford. Cong. Ch.                                        3.91
    Saint Cloud. First Cong. Ch.                              11.00
    Tivoli. Lyman Humiston                                     2.00
    ——. “Thank Offering” (50 of which _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._)                                      200.00
    Minn. Woman’s Home Missionary Society, _for
      Woman’s Work_, by Mrs. Clara N. Cross,
      Treas.:
        Alexandria. W. M. S.                          20.00
        Austin. W. M. S.                               9.80
        Elk River. S. S.                               3.05
        Excelsior. W. M. S.                            3.56
        Glyndon. Children’s M. Band                    2.30
        Granite Falls. W. M. S.                        1.88
        Detroit. W. M. S.                              1.00
        Marshall. W. M. S.                             5.00
        Mapleton. W. M. S.                             2.50
        Minneapolis. W. H. M. S., Plymouth
              Ch., to const. MRS. C. T.
              INGERSOLL, MRS. CHAS. L.
              LEONARD and MISS ADA WHITE L. M’s       81.50
        Minneapolis. Y. L. M. S. Plymouth Ch.         20.75
        Minneapolis. W. M. S. Second Ch.               6.00
        Minneapolis. Children’s Miss. Band.
              Open Door Ch.                            2.00
        Morris. W. M. S.                               5.47
        Northfield. W. H. M. S.                       40.00
        Saint Paul. W. H. M. S., Park Ch., to
              cons’t. MRS. HUGH M. MILLER L.
              M.                                      35.00
        Saint Paul. W. H. M. S., Plymouth Ch.         10.00
        Stephen. W. M. S.                              1.65
        Waseca. W. M. S.                               3.40
                                                      —————  254.86


  MISSOURI, $75.00.

    Saint Louis. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                            75.00


  KANSAS, $93.40.

    Boston Mills. J. Hubbard                                   5.00
    Burlington. First Cong. Ch.                                7.50
    Douglass. Cong. Ch.                                        1.25
    Lawrence. Plymouth Ch., 49.06; Second Cong. Ch., 6        55.06
    Solomon City. “Thank Offering from a Friend”               5.00
    Sterling. Cong. Ch.                                       19.59


  MONTANA, $12.76.

    Helena. First Cong. Ch.                                   12.76


  DAKOTA, $42.63.

    Carrington. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                     4.75
    Clark. Cong. Ch.                                           6.20
    Lake Preston. Cong. Ch.                                   11.00
    Valley Springs. Cong. Ch.                                  4.09
    Vermillion. Cong. Ch.                                     13.39
    Dakota Woman’s Home Missionary Union, _for
      Woman’s Work_, by Mrs. Sue Fifield, Treas.:
        De Smet. W. M. S.                              3.20
                                                       ————    3.20


  NEBRASKA, $28.63.

    Tremont. Cong. Ch.                                        20.63
    Hemingford. Cong. Ch.                                      3.00
    Oxford. F. A. Wood                                         5.00


  OREGON, $7.49.

    East Portland. First Cong. Ch.                             7.49


  WASHINGTON TER., $5.00.

    Christopher. White River Cong. Ch.                         5.00


  CALIFORNIA, $17.40.

    Riverside. Sab. Sch. Class, by Chas. W. Herron             3.75
    San Diego. Second Con. Ch., 2.65; Sab. Sch.,
      Second Cong. Ch., 1                                      3.65
    Stockton. Rev. J. C. Holbrook, D.D.                       10.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $8.31.

    Washington. Lincoln Memorial Ch.                           8.31


  KENTUCKY, $78.20.

    Williamsburg. Cong. Ch.                                   48.20
    Williamsburg. Tuition                                     30.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $86.37.

    Nalls. Dea. A. B. Bruton                                   0.50
    Troy. Tuition, 1.55; “Friends,” 1, by S. D. Leak           2.55
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                     83.32


  TENNESSEE, $119.25.

    Grand View. Tuition                                       29.80
    Helenwood. Judge J. C. Parker                              2.50
    Memphis. Tuition                                          15.00
    Nashville. Rent                                            6.50
    Robbins. Cong. Ch.                                         0.90
    Sherwood. Tuition                                         64.55


  GEORGIA, $59.80.

    Andersonville. Coll. “Children’s Day”                      0.45
    Atlanta. Nettie Smith, _for Atlanta U._                    0.50
    Marietta. Cong. Ch., 50c., and Sab. Sch. 50c.              1.00
    Rutland. Coll. “Children’s Day”                            0.65
    Woodville. Pilgrim Ch.                                     2.10


  ALABAMA, $245.65.

    Marion. Tuition                                           55.00
    Selma. Rent                                              100.00
    Talladega. Tuition                                        90.65


  MISSISSIPPI, $1004.00.

    Tougaloo. State Appropriation, _for Tougaloo U._        1000.00
    Tougaloo. Rent                                             4.00


  INCOMES, $750.00.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                               570.00
    Belden Sch’p Fund, _for Talladega C._                     30.00
    Graves Library Fund, _for Atlanta U._                    150.00


  CANADA, $5.00.

    Montreal. Chas. Alexander                                  5.00


  SANDWICH ISLANDS, $400.00.

    “Sandwich Islands. A Friend”                             400.00


  CHINA, $5.00.

    Fenchow Fu, Shansi. Rev. J. B. Thompson                    5.00
                                                         ==========
    Donations                                            $17,683.88
    Estates                                                1,564.30
    Incomes                                                  750.00
    Tuitions                                               1,341.65
    Rents                                                    110.50
                                                         ——————————
    Total for July                                       $21,450.33
    Total from Oct. 1 to July 31                         235,884.73
                                                         ==========


  FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions for July                                   $47.89
    Previously acknowledged                                  826.12
                                                            ———————
    Total                                                   $874.01
                                                           ========

                                      H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                                56 Reade St., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




_Advertisements._

                       JAMES McCREERY & CO.

                  Importers and Manufacturers of

                          Fine Dry Goods.

In this store customers can shop by mail as successfully as in
person.

Samples for the Fall and Winter Season are now ready and will be
sent upon application.

Orders by mail or by express are executed the same day they are
received.

                        JAMES McCREERY CO.

                    BROADWAY and ELEVENTH ST.,
                             NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: TRY THEM. TAKE NO OTHER.]


                               GOOD
                               SENSE
                              CORDED
                          CORSET WAISTS.

Beautifully made of =BEST Materials= throughout. =Thousands Now in
Use.= ☞ Be sure your Corset is stamped “=Good Sense=.” =FIT ALL
AGES=—Infants to Adults. Sold by

                       Leading =RETAILERS=
                           =EVERYWHERE=.

                        Send for circular.

                          _FERRIS BROS._
                          Manufacturers,
                     341 Broadway, =NEW YORK=.
                  MARSHALL FIELD & CO., CHICAGO,
                     WHOLESALE WESTERN AGENTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

                        MENEELY & COMPANY,
                      WEST TROY, N.Y., BELLS,

For Churches, Schools, etc., also Chimes and Peals. For more than
half a century noted for superiority over all others.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        GOOD THINGS MUSICAL

                   THAT ARE COMING IN THE FALL.

Whatever they are, the music to perform them, to understand them,
to enjoy them, will be found in the immense establishments of
=OLIVER DITSON & CO.=, who have on hand

=CONCERT SONGS, GOSPEL SONGS, SACRED SONGS, SCHOOL SONGS, SUNDAY
SCHOOL SONGS, COMIC SONGS, COLLEGE SONGS, JUBILEE SONGS, POPULAR
SONGS, CHOIR AND CONGREGATIONAL MUSIC, TONIC-SOL-FA MUSIC, CATHOLIC
MUSIC, ANTHEMS AND CHORUSES, PART SONGS AND GLEES, OPERA, ORATORIO
AND CANTATA MUSIC, COLLECTIONS OF MUSIC FOR PIANO, ORGAN, AND ALL
OTHER INSTRUMENTS, AND IN FACT EVERY KIND OF MUSIC THAT IS MADE.=

All this is in the shape of Sheet Music (3.000,000 pieces), Octavo
Music (3,000 kinds), or of music collected in well-bound books
(4,000 kinds). Send for Lists, Catalogues, Descriptions and Advice.
Any book mailed for retail price.


                   SOME OF THE NEWEST BOOKS ARE:

=PIANO CLASSICS, CLASSICAL PIANIST. YOUNG PEOPLE’S CLASSICS, SONG
CLASSICS. Soprano; SONG CLASSICS. Alto and Bass; CLASSIC TENOR
SONGS.= Each, $1.00. Very select and good music.

Send the price of any book and receive it by return mail. The
convenience of this arrangement is appreciated by thousands of
customers.

                  _Oliver Ditson & Co., Boston._
            C. H. DITSON & CO., 867 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             INDELIBLE

Mark your Clothing!

Clear Record of half a Century.

[Illustration]

“Most Reliable and Simplest for plain or decorative marking.”

Use a common pen.

  Sold by all Druggists, Stationers,
  News and Fancy Goods dealers.

                             PAYSON’S
                          Indelible Ink!


                 *       *       *       *       *


               “A THING OF BEAUTY IS A JOY FOREVER.”

[Illustration:

  THE RISING SUN
  TRADE MARK
  STOVE POLISH

  PRICE 10 CENTS

  MORSE
  BROS.
  Proprietors
  CANTON MASS.

For beauty of polish, saving of labor, freeness from dust,
durability and cheapness, truly unrivalled in any country.

CAUTION.—Beware of worthless imitations under other names, put up
in similar shape and color intended to deceive. Each package of the
genuine bears our Trade Mark. Take no other.]

                              SOLD BY
                             MERCHANTS
                               —IN—
                            _CIVILIZED_
                            COUNTRIES.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                         JOSEPH GILLOTT’S
                            STEEL PENS
                 GOLD MEDAL PARIS EXPOSITION—1878.
                     THE MOST PERFECT OF PENS


                 *       *       *       *       *


THE LEADING CORSETS OF EUROPE AND AMERICA.

[Illustration:

  WARNER
  BRO’S

  CELEBRATED

  CORALINE
  AND
  HEALTH
  CORSETS]

Over 2,000,000 sold last year in this country alone.

The reasons are—

They are the best fitting, best feeling and best wearing corset
ever made.

Avoid worthless imitations CORALINE is used in no corsets except
those made by us. None are genuine unless

                      “DR. WARNER’S CORALINE”

  is printed on inside of steel cover.

                FOR SALE BY ALL LEADING MERCHANTS.

                         WARNER BROTHERS,
                   359 BROADWAY,       NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                 FRENCH, GERMAN, SPANISH, ITALIAN.

You can, by ten weeks’ study, master either of these languages
sufficiently for every-day and business conversation, by Dr. RICH.
S. ROSENTHAL’S celebrated MEISTERSCHAFT SYSTEM. Terms $5.00 for
books of each language, with privilege of answers to all questions,
and correction of exercises. Sample copy, Part I., 25 _cents_.
Liberal terms to teachers.


            MEISTERSCHAFT PUBLISHING CO., BOSTON, MASS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


=$75 to $250 A MONTH= can be made working for us. Agents preferred
who can furnish a horse and give their whole time to the business.
Spare moments may be profitably employed also. A few vacancies in
towns and cities. B. F. JOHNSON & CO., 1009 Main Street, Richmond,
Va.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                    DO YOU WANT A GOOD, HONEST
                        PAINT? HERE IT IS:

[Illustration:

  READY MIXED
  5 GALL’S

  LIQUID
  COTTAGE COLORS

  QUALITY GUARANTEED
  CHICAGO WHITE LEAD & OIL CO.
  MANUFACTURERS.]


                     CORRESPONDENCE SOLICITED.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  OUR
  TRADE MARK
  HAM
  F.A. FERRIS & CO.
  NEW YORK

  USE

  “Our constant
  aim is to make them
  the Finest in the World.”

  “OUR TRADE-MARK”
  BACON
  BONELESS

  MADE BY
  FERRIS & COMPANY.
  NEW YORK]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            _6%_, _7%_.

                   _THE AMERICAN INVESTMENT CO._

                       OF EMMETTSBURG, IOWA,

with a PAID-UP CAPITAL of $600,000, SURPLUS $75,000, offers First
Mortgage Loans drawing SEVEN per cent., both Principal and Interest
FULLY GUARANTEED. Also 6 per cent. ten-year Debenture Bonds,
secured by 105 per cent. of First Mortgage Loans held in trust by
the MERCANTILE TRUST COMPANY, New York. 5 per cent. certificates of
deposit for periods under one year.

                 =7⅔%= CAN BE REALIZED BY CHANGING
                   =4 Per Ct. Government Bonds=
                   Into 6 Per Cent. Debentures.

          Write for full information and reference to the
                            Company at

                   150 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK.
          A. L. ORMSBY, Vice-President and Gen. Manager.


                 *       *       *       *       *


               _Positive Results_ of a Policy in the

                 MANHATTAN LIFE, ON THE NEW PLAN.

        Age, 30; Amount of Policy, $10,000; Term, 20 Years.

  The Annual Premium will be                    $301.80
                                                ———————
  At the end of that time the Company will
    return to the holder in cash,             $5,700.00

  Thus the $10,000 insurance will have been
    secured at the net cost for 20 years of
    only                                         336.00
                                              —————————
  $1.68 per year for $10,000 insurance, or if
    the Cash be not drawn the policy will
    become paid up for                       $10,050.00

These results are not estimated, but are fixed in a positive
contract, the full face of the Policy meanwhile being payable in
the event of the death of the assured. There is no forfeiture of
payment on discontinuance of policy after three years, a =CASH OR
PAID UP VALUE BEING GUARANTEED BY THE TERMS OF THE NEW YORK LAW.=

For examples of other ages, and also on the 10 and 15 years’ plan,
write or apply at the office.

NOTE.—The MANHATTAN’S is the simplest form of policy in existence,
and incontestible after three years, this feature having been
originated and adopted by this Company over 23 years ago.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                 The MANHATTAN LIFE INSURANCE CO.,
                  _156 & 158 Broadway, New York_.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                    JAMES M. McLEAN, President.
               JACOB L. HALSEY, 1st Vice-President.
                HENRY B. STOKES, 2d Vice-President.
         HENRY Y. WEMPLE, Secy.      S. N. STEBBINS, Ac’y.


                 *       *       *       *       *




THE FORTY-SECOND ANNUAL MEETING

OF THE

AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION

WILL BE HELD AT

PROVIDENCE, R.I., OCT. 23-25.


Rev. Arthur Little, D.D., of Chicago, will preach the sermon.

The Meeting will be held in the Union Congregational Church, of
which Rev. J. Hall McIlvaine, D.D., is Pastor. The friends in
Providence have already begun preparations for the reception of the
Association.

Life Members and Delegates chosen by contributing churches, Local
Conferences, and State Associations, constitute the Annual Meeting,
as will be seen by the following article of the Constitution.

  ART. III. Members of evangelical churches may be constituted
  members of this Association for life by the payment of thirty
  dollars into its treasury, with the written declaration at
  the time or times of payment that the sum is to be applied
  to constitute a designated person a life member; and such
  membership shall begin sixty days after the payment shall have
  been completed. Other persons, by the payment of the same sum,
  may be made life members, without the privilege of voting.

  Every evangelical church which has within a year contributed
  to the funds of the Association, and every State Conference
  or Association of such churches, may appoint two delegates to
  the Annual Meeting of the Association; such delegates, duly
  attested by credentials, shall be members of the Association
  for the year for which they were thus appointed.

So far as possible, the Providence churches will entertain those
who attend. Those purposing to be present and wishing entertainment
are requested to write to Rev. J. Hall McIlvaine, D.D., Providence,
R.I., Chairman of the Committee of Entertainment.

Special rates will be arranged at hotels for those who desire to
pay their own way. Railroad and steamboat favors will be secured as
far as possible, and notices of reductions and other matters will
appear later in this Magazine and in the religious press.

       *       *       *       *       *


HOLT BROTHERS’ PRESS, 17-27 Vandewater St., N.Y.




Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions silently
corrected. Period spelling and inconsistent hyphenation retained.
Ditto marks replaced with the text they represent to facilitate
eBook text alignment.

Upside-down ‘g’ corrected in the entry for West Falmouth on page
262.

Bidddford changed to Biddeford on page 262.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 42, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER, 1888 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.