ADDRESS
                                  OF
                          PRESIDENT COOLIDGE

                                BEFORE

                      THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF THE
                         BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA


                           Washington, D. C.
                              May 1, 1926


                            [Illustration]


                              WASHINGTON
                      GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                 1926




                            [Illustration]




                                ADDRESS


_Members of the National Council of the Boy Scouts of America_:

The strength and hope of civilization lies in its power to adapt
itself to changing circumstances. Development and character are not
passive accomplishments. They can be secured only through action. The
strengthening of the physical body, the sharpening of the senses, the
quickening of the intellect, are all the result of that mighty effort
which we call the struggle for existence. Down through the ages it was
carried on for the most part in the open, out in the fields, along the
streams, and over the surface of the sea. It was there that mankind met
the great struggle which has been waged with the forces of nature. We
are what that struggle has made us. When the race ceases to be engaged
in that great strength-giving effort the race will not be what it is
now――it will change to something else. These age-old activities or
their equivalent are vital to a continuation of human development. They
are invaluable in the growth and training of youth.

Towns and cities and industrial life are very recent and modern
acquirements. Such an environment did not contribute to the making of
the race, nor was it bred in the lap of present-day luxury. It was
born of adversity and nurtured by necessity. Though the environment
has greatly changed, human nature has not changed. If the same natural
life in the open requiring something of the same struggle, surrounded
by the same elements of adversity and necessity, is gradually passing
away in the experience of the great mass of the people; if the old
struggle with nature no longer goes on; if the usual environment has
been very largely changed, it becomes exceedingly necessary that an
artificial environment be created to supply the necessary process for a
continuation of the development and character of the race. The cinder
track must be substituted for the chase.

Art therefore has been brought in to take the place of nature. One of
the great efforts in that direction is represented by the Boy Scout
movement. It was founded in the United States in 1910. In September
of that year the organization was given a great impetus by the visit
of the man whom we are delighted to honor this evening, Sir Robert
Baden-Powell. This distinguished British general is now known all over
the world as the originator of this idea. That it has been introduced
into almost every civilized country must be to him a constant source
of great gratification. The first annual meeting was held in the East
Room of the White House in February, 1911, when President Taft made
an address, and each of his successors has been pleased to serve as
the honorary president of the association. It has been dignified by a
Federal charter granted by the Congress to the Boy Scouts of America
in 1916, and thereby ranks in the popular mind with the only two other
organizations which have been similarly honored, the Red Cross and the
American Legion.

The Boy Scouts have been fortunate in enlisting the interest of
prominent men of our country to serve as the active head of the
organization. For the current year that position was held by no less a
figure than the late James J. Storrow. His untimely taking off was a
sad experience to all of us who knew him. I cherished him personally
as a friend. I admired him for the broad public spirit that he always
exhibited. Amid all the varied and exacting activities as one of our
foremost business men, he yet found time to devote his thought and
energy and personal attention to the advancement of this movement. His
memory will constantly bring to us all that sentiment which he uttered
in the New Year message that he gave to the scouts, in expressing the
hope that it might bring “A more vivid realization that it is the
spirit and the spiritual sides of life that count.”

The more I have studied this movement, its inception, purposes,
organization, and principles, the more I have been impressed. Not only
is it based on the fundamental rules of right thinking and acting but
it seems to embrace in its code almost every virtue needed in the
personal and social life of mankind. It is a wonderful instrument
for good. It is an inspiration to you whose duty and privilege it is
to widen its horizon and extend its influence. If every boy in the
United States between the ages of 12 and 17 could be placed under the
wholesome influences of the scout program and should live up to the
scout oath and rules, we would hear fewer pessimistic words as to the
future of our Nation.

The boy on becoming a scout binds himself on his honor to do his best,
as the oath reads:

    “1. To do my duty to God and my country, and to obey the scout
    law.

    “2. To help other people at all times.

    “3. To keep myself physically strong, mentally awake, and
    morally straight.”

The 12 articles in these scout laws are not prohibitions, but
obligations; affirmative rules of conduct. Members must promise to
be trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous, kind, obedient,
cheerful, thrifty, brave, clean, and reverent. How comprehensive this
list! What a formula for developing moral and spiritual character!
What an opportunity for splendid service in working to strengthen
their observance by all scouts and to extend their influence to all
boys eligible for membership! It would be a perfect world if everyone
exemplified these virtues in daily life.

Acting under these principles, remarkable progress has been made. Since
1910, 3,000,000 boys in the United States have been scouts――one out
of every seven eligible. Who can estimate the physical, mental, and
spiritual force that would have been added to our national life during
this period if the other six also had been scouts?

On January 1, 1926, there was an enrollment of nearly 600,000 boys,
directed by 165,000 volunteer leaders and divided among 23,000 troops.
Such is the field that has been cultivated. The great need now is for
more leaders, inspired for service and properly equipped to carry out
the program. It is estimated that 1,000,000 additional boys could be
enrolled immediately if adequate leadership could be provided. We can
not do too much honor to the 500,000 men who in the past 16 years have
given freely of their time and energy as scout masters and assistant
scout masters. Such service is service to God and to country. The
efforts to get more devoted volunteers and to find and train those
fitted and willing to make this their life work is worthy of the most
complete success.

Because the principles of this movement are affirmative, I believe
they are sound. The boy may not be merely passive in his allegiance
to righteousness. He must be an active force in his home, his church,
and his community. Too few people have a clear realization of the real
purposes of the Boy Scouts. In the popular mind the program is arranged
for play, for recreation, is designed solely to utilize the spare time
of the boy in such a way that he may develop physically while engaged
in pleasurable pursuits. This is but a faint conception, one almost
wholly misleading. The program is a means to an end. Its fundamental
object is to use modern environment in character building and training
for citizenship.

Character is what a person is; it represents the aggregate of
distinctive mental and moral qualities belonging to an individual or a
race. Good character means a mental and moral fiber of high order, one
which may be woven into the fabric of the community and State, going to
make a great nation――great in the broadest meaning of that word.

The organization of the scouts is particularly suitable for a
representative democracy such as ours, where our institutions rest
on the theory of self-government and public functions are exercised
through delegated authority. The boys are taught to practice the basic
virtues and principles of right living and to act for themselves in
accordance with such virtues and principles. They learn self-direction
and self-control.

The organization is not intended to take the place of the home or
religion, but to supplement and cooperate with those important
factors in our national life. We hear much talk of the decline in the
influence of religion, of the loosening of the home ties, of the lack
of discipline――all tending to break down reverence and respect for the
laws of God and of man. Such thought as I have been able to give to
the subject and such observations as have come within my experience
have convinced me that there is no substitute for the influences of
the home and of religion. These take hold of the innermost nature
of the individual and play a very dominant part in the formation of
personality and character. This most necessary and most valuable
service has to be performed by the parents, or it is not performed at
all. It is the root of the family life. Nothing else can ever take its
place. These duties can be performed by foster parents with partial
success, but any attempt on the part of the Government to function in
these directions breaks down almost entirely. The Boy Scout movement
can never be a success as a substitute but only as an ally of strict
parental control and family life under religious influences. Parents
can not shift their responsibility. If they fail to exercise proper
control, nobody else can do it for them.

The last item in the scout “duodecalogue” is impressive. It declares
that a scout shall be reverent. “He is reverent toward God,” the
paragraph reads. “He is faithful in his religious duty――respects the
convictions of others in matters of custom and religion.” In the past
I have declared my conviction that our Government rests upon religion;
that religion is the source from which we derive our reverence for
truth and justice, for equality and liberty, and for the rights of
mankind. So wisely and liberally is the Boy Scout movement designed
that the various religious denominations have found it a most helpful
agency in arousing and maintaining interest in the work of their
various societies. This has helped to emphasize in the minds of youth
the importance of teaching our boys to respect the religious opinions
and social customs of others.

The scout theory takes the boy at an age when he is apt to get ensnared
in the complexities and false values of our latter-day life, and it
turns his attention toward the simple, the natural, the genuine. It
provides a program for the utilization of his spare time outside his
home and school and church duties. While ofttimes recreational, it is
in the best sense constructive. It aims to give a useful outlet for
the abundant energies of the boy, to have valuable knowledge follow
innate curiosity, to develop skill and self-reliance――the power to
bring things to pass――by teaching one how to use both the hand and
the head. In the city-bred boy is developed love for the country, a
realization of what nature means, of its power to heal the wounds
and to soothe the frayed nerves incident to modern civilization. He
learns that in the woods and on the hillside, on the plain, and by the
stream, he has a chance to think upon the eternal verities, to get a
clarity of vision――a chance which the confusion and speed of city life
too often renders difficult if not impossible of attainment. There
is a very real value in implanting this idea in our boys. When they
take up the burdens of manhood they may be led to return to the simple
life for periods of physical, mental, and spiritual refreshment and
reinvigoration.

Scouting very definitely teaches that rewards come only after
achievement through personal effort and self-discipline. The boy enters
as a tenderfoot. As he develops he becomes a second-class scout and
then a first-class scout. Still there is before him the opportunity, in
accordance with ability and hard work, to advance and get merit badges
for proficiency in some 70 subjects pertaining to the arts, trades, and
sciences. It is interesting to learn that in the year 1925, 195,000
merit badges were awarded as compared with 140,000 in 1924. Twenty-one
such awards make the boy an “eagle scout,” the highest rank. Not only
does one learn to do things, but in many instances he learns what he
can do best. He is guided to his life work. Vocational experts will
tell you in dollars and cents what this means to society where so often
much valuable time and effort is wasted by the young before they have
tested, proven, and trained their individual powers.

The boy learns “to be prepared.” This is the motto of the scouts. They
are prepared to take their proper place in life, prepared to meet any
unusual situation arising in their personal or civic relations. The
scout is taught to be courageous and self-sacrificing. Individually
he must do one good deed each day. He is made to understand that he
is a part of organized society; that he owes an obligation to that
society. Among the many activities in which the scouts have rendered
public service are those for the protection of birds and wild life
generally, for the conservation of natural resources, reforestation,
for carrying out the “Safety first” idea. They have taken part in
campaigns for church cooperation, in drives against harmful literature,
and the promotion of an interest in wholesome, worth-while reading.
In many communities they have cooperated with the police and fire
departments. In some instances they have studied the machinery of
government by temporary and volunteer participation in the city and
State administration. During the war they helped in the Liberty-loan
campaigns, and more recently they have assisted in “Get out the vote”
movements.

All of this is exceedingly practical. It provides a method both for
the training of youth and adapting him to modern life. The age-old
principle of education through action and character through effort
is well exemplified, but in addition the very valuable element has
been added of a training for community life. It has been necessary
for society to discard some of its old individualistic tendencies
and promote a larger liberty and a more abundant life by cooperative
effort. This theory has been developed under the principle of the
division of labor, but the division of labor fails completely if any
one of the divisions ceases to function.

It is well that boys should learn that lesson at an early age. Very
soon they will be engaged in carrying on the work of the world. Some
will enter the field of transportation, some of banking, some of
industry, some of agriculture; some will be in the public service,
in the police department, in the fire department, in the Post Office
Department, in the health department. The public welfare, success,
and prosperity of the Nation will depend upon the proper coordination
of all these various efforts and upon each loyally performing the
service undertaken. It will no longer do for those who have assumed the
obligation to society of carrying on these different functions to say
that as a body they are absolutely free and independent and responsible
to no one but themselves. The public interest is greater than the
interest of any one of these groups, and it is absolutely necessary
that this interest be made supreme. But there is just as great a
necessity on the part of the public to see that each of these groups is
justly treated. Otherwise, government and society will be thrown into
chaos. On each one of us rests a moral obligation to do our share of
the world’s work. We have no right to refuse.

The training of the Boy Scouts fits them to an early realization of
this great principle and adapts them in habits and thoughts and life
to its observances. We know too well what fortune overtakes those
who attempt to live in opposition to these standards. They become at
once rightfully and truly branded as outlaws. However much they may
boast of their freedom from all restraints and their disregard of all
conventionalities of society, they are immediately the recognized foes
of their brethren. Their short existence is lived under greater and
greater restrictions, in terror of the law, in flight from arrest, or
in imprisonment. Instead of gaining freedom, they become the slaves of
their own evil doing, realizing the scriptural assertion that they who
sin are the servants of sin and that the wages of sin is death. The Boy
Scout movement has been instituted in order that the youth, instead of
falling under the domination of habits and actions that lead only to
destruction, may come under the discipline of a training that leads to
eternal life. They learn that they secure freedom and prosperity by
observing the law.

This is but one of the many organizations that are working for good in
our country. Some of them have a racial basis, some a denominational
basis. All of them in their essence are patriotic and religious. Their
steady growth and widening influence go very far to justify our faith
in the abiding fitness of things. We can not deny that there are evil
forces all about us, but a critical examination of what is going on in
the world can not fail to justify the belief that wherever these powers
of evil may be located, however great may be their apparent extent,
they are not realities, and somewhere there is developing an even
greater power of good by which they will be overcome.

We need a greater faith in the strength of right living. We need a
greater faith in the power of righteousness. These are the realities
which do not pass away. On these everlasting principles rests the
movement of the Boy Scouts of America. It is one of the growing
institutions by which our country is working out the fulfillment of an
eternal promise.


                            [Illustration]



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADDRESS OF PRESIDENT COOLIDGE BEFORE THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF THE BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.