Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_




  THE ADVENTURES OF

  UNCLE WIGGILY

  THE BUNNY RABBIT GENTLEMAN
  WITH THE TWINKLING PINK NOSE

  By
  HOWARD R. GARIS

  Pictures by
  LANG CAMPBELL

  [Illustration: Decoration]

  CHARLES E. GRAHAM & CO.
  NEWARK, N. J.    ::    NEW YORK




  COPYRIGHT 1924
  BY
  CHARLES E. GRAHAM & CO.

[Illustration: _Made in U. S. A._]




[Illustration: Uncle Wiggily and Nurse Jane]




ADVENTURES OF UNCLE WIGGILY AND NURSE JANE


Once upon a time Uncle Wiggily said to his muskrat lady housekeeper:
“Nurse Jane, we are going to the woods.” “What shall we do in the
woods?” asked Miss Fuzzy Wuzzy, twisting her tail around under her
dress. “We shall visit the Squiggle Bugs, perhaps,” laughed Uncle
Wiggily, twinkling his pink nose. “And we may have an adventure.”
“You never know what will happen when you go to the woods,” said
Nurse Jane. “And, as you might get into danger if you went alone,
I will go with you.” The bunny rabbit and Nurse Jane hopped to the
forest. Suddenly Miss Fuzzy Wuzzy pulled Uncle Wiggily’s coat tails
and whispered: “See! There is a flat stump table, and on it are good
things to eat!” “Oh, yes!” cried Mr. Longears. “And, as no one is
there, we may as well sit down and eat the picnic lunch.” “What a
large pitcher of lemonade!” said Nurse Jane. “Whose is it, Uncle
Wiggily?” “Maybe it belongs to a giant,” answered the bunny. “Oh,
dear!” cried Nurse Jane. “Don’t be afraid,” said the rabbit. Nurse
Jane felt relieved.

[Illustration: two bears]

[Illustration: bear falls on table]


Now, the stump table had been set in the woods by a Mother Bear and
her two little cubs. Soon the three bears, who had gone looking for
honey, came back. “Oh, Mother!” growled Little Cub Goopy, “someone is
at our table!” “They are eating all our good things!” whined Little
Cub Snoopy. Mother Bear grumbled: “My goodness!” “Let me crawl out
on a branch over their heads, Mother,” whispered Goopy. “I’ll drop
acorns on that muskrat lady and bunny uncle to scare them.” Mother
Bear helped Goopy climb the tree while Snoopy held her tail. A branch
of the tree waved over the stump table. Goopy climbed up softly.
Neither Uncle Wiggily nor Nurse Jane heard him. “This is a fine
picnic,” laughed the bunny, eating a cake. Just then Goopy, out on
the end of the branch, slipped and tumbled into the big pitcher of
lemonade, splashing it all over Uncle Wiggily and Nurse Jane. Uncle
Wiggily hopped home to his bungalow.

[Illustration: UNCLE WIGGILY HOPPED HOME TO HIS BUNGALOW.]

[Illustration: bear falls on table]

[Illustration: bear gets spanked]

“Where are you going?” squeaked Nurse Jane. Uncle Wiggily answered:
“I am going to get a piece of sticky fly paper to catch any more
bears that may drop down.” With the sticky paper, Mr. Longears hopped
back to the woods. He put the sticky paper on the stump table. Little
Cub Goopy, who had scrambled out of the lemonade, ran back to Mother
Bear. “Now I will climb the tree and scare away Uncle Wiggily,”
Little Cub Snoopy whispered. So he climbed out on the branch. But
his paws slipped and down he fell on the sticky fly paper. “Bless
my pink, twinkling nose!” cried Uncle Wiggily as he danced with the
big lemonade pitcher. “Guff! Guff!” whined Snoopy. The rabbit pulled
the little cub off the sticky paper and said: “I am going to tickle
you to make you a better bear.” The bunny softly patted little Cub
Snoopy. Then Uncle Wiggily balanced his rheumatism crutch on the end
of his nose.

[Illustration: UNCLE WIGGILY BALANCED HIS RHEUMATISM CRUTCH ON HIS
NOSE.]

[Illustration: Nurse Jane puts basket over bear]

[Illustration: Nurse Jane and Uncle Wiggily walk away]

“Why are you doing that?” asked Nurse Jane. Uncle Wiggily danced
around as he answered: “I want to make Mother Bear laugh at this
funny trick so she won’t bite us.” But Mother Bear would not laugh.
“Gurr! Gurr!” she growled, pretending to be angry. “I think I shall
nibble your ears, Uncle Wiggily!” “What for?” asked the bunny rabbit.
“For eating my little cubs’ lunch and for tickling Snoopy,” replied
Mother Bear. “Yes, I shall nibble your ears!” “Oh, no, you shall not
do that!” cried Nurse Jane. Then the muskrat lady took one of the
empty lunch baskets and slipped it over Mother Bear’s head. “Now you
can’t nibble any ears!” said Miss Fuzzy Wuzzy. “Ha! Ha!” laughed
Uncle Wiggily, waving his paw. Little Cub Goopy and Little Cub Snoopy
sat up together like twins. “Wuff! Wuff!” growled Mother Bear as she
sat down to get the basket off her head. Then the bunny and Nurse
Jane ran safely home.

[Illustration: UNCLE WIGGILY HOPPED INTO BED.]

[Illustration: Uncle Wiggily climbs tree]

[Illustration: Nurse Jane on swing]

Next day Uncle Wiggily arose early. “Ah, ha, Nurse Jane!” he greeted
the muskrat lady. “Do you want to go to the woods and have another
adventure with bears?” Miss Fuzzy Wuzzy said she would rather have
different fun. “Then I’ll tell you what we can do,” spoke Uncle
Wiggily. “We’ll take our own lunch and go visiting in the forest.”
Nurse Jane asked whom they would visit. “Oh, perhaps the Squiggle
Bugs,” answered the bunny. So he and the muskrat lady went to the
woods. “What are you going to do with the rope, Uncle Wiggily?” asked
Nurse Jane. “I am going to make you a swing,” politely replied the
rabbit. He climbed a tree, fastened the rope to a branch and made a
swing for his housekeeper. “Up you go!” cried the bunny, giving Nurse
Jane a push. Up and down she swung, and then she called: “I wish I
had a drink!” Uncle Wiggily hopped to the spring and filled his tall,
silk hat to the brim with water.

[Illustration: UNCLE WIGGILY FILLED HIS HAT WITH WATER.]

[Illustration: Nurse Jane falls]

[Illustration: Uncle Wiggily makes hammock]

Nurse Jane thanked the rabbit, drank the water and swung by herself,
while Uncle Wiggily slept under the trees until it was time to eat
lunch. All at once the bunny sneezed, and opening his eyes, he saw a
Squiggle Bug tickling his nose. “Look at Nurse Jane!” buzzed the Bug.
“She is swinging too high!” All of a sudden the swing rope broke and
down fell the muskrat lady. “Oh, I am so sorry!” cried Uncle Wiggily.
“Are you hurt?” Nurse Jane said she wasn’t. “I think a hammock would
be safer,” spoke the rabbit. He made a hammock out of grass and
cobwebs. “Get in,” the bunny invited Nurse Jane, “and the Squiggle
Bug will pull you.” Suddenly, while Nurse Jane was swinging in the
hammock, the grass rope broke and she began to fall. Then a Giant
Squiggle Bug flew past and caught one end of the hammock. “Come here,
Uncle Wiggily!” buzzed the Bug. “Don’t let Nurse Jane bump!” cried
the rabbit gentleman.

[Illustration: “DON’T LET NURSE JANE BUMP,” CRIED THE RABBIT.]

[Illustration: Uncle Wiggily crosses brook]

[Illustration: Nurse Jane falls in brook]

Uncle Wiggily and the Bug let Nurse Jane down easily. When the
muskrat lady crawled out of the hammock she said: “No more of
that, if you please!” The Giant Bug flew away after Uncle Wiggily
had thanked him. Then the little Squiggle Bug said: “I think you
will have more adventures on the other side of the brook. I will
lead you to a plank bridge.” When they reached the bridge over the
brook the Squiggle Bug walked first. “I’ll go next to see if it is
safe,” offered Uncle Wiggily. After he had crossed, Miss Fuzzy Wuzzy
started, but, as the muskrat lady reached the middle of the plank
bridge, it broke! Into the water she splashed! The Squiggle Bug
tossed her the end of a cobweb, and he and Mr. Longears pulled Nurse
Jane out of the water. Then, all of a sudden as they were going to
eat the picnic lunch, a Fuzzy Fox ran away with the basket, and Uncle
Wiggily ran after him waving his rheumatism crutch.

[Illustration: A FUZZY FOX RAN AWAY WITH THE BASKET.]

[Illustration: Uncle Wiggily sets table]

[Illustration: Table is a turtle]

Uncle Wiggily ran after the Fuzzy Fox. “I’ll get you!” shouted the
bunny. The Fox ran fast but the rabbit hopped faster and took away
the lunch basket from the bad chap. “I would nibble your ears, only
I’m out of breath!” panted the Fox. “Ha! Ha!” laughed Uncle Wiggily.
He hopped back to Nurse Jane with the lunch. “Where can we set a
table?” asked Miss Fuzzy Wuzzy. Along crawled a big mud turtle.
“We’ll set our table on the turtle’s back,” said Uncle Wiggily. So
they did. But, all of a sudden, as she sat down on a toad stool
to eat, Nurse Jane spilled some pepper on the turtle’s tail. Away
crawled the turtle as fast as he could go, spilling the picnic lunch.
“Oh, dear! How can we get anything to eat?” sighed Nurse Jane. “We
shall go visit Mr. Twistytail, a pig gentleman I know,” answered the
bunny. Mr. Twistytail invited Nurse Jane and Uncle Wiggily to dinner.
They had apple pudding with sour milk sauce.

[Illustration: MR. TWISTY TAIL INVITED UNCLE WIGGILY TO DINNER.]

[Illustration: Bunny house]

[Illustration: Bunny in house]

When Uncle Wiggily and Nurse Jane reached home, after having dined
with Mr. Twistytail, the rabbit said: “I have had enough adventures
for a while.” But the next day there sounded a knock at his door.
“Some one is coming to ask you to go adventuring again,” squeaked
Nurse Jane. Uncle Wiggily opened the door and saw Nannie Wagtail the
Goat and Susie Littletail the rabbit. “Please make us a playhouse,”
begged the animal girls. The bunny made them a fine play house with
a chimney, a door, a window and everything. “And don’t let any of
the animal boys come to bother us!” bleated Nannie. “No, I won’t,”
promised Uncle Wiggily. But a little while after that Susie crawled
from the play house, outside of which sat her doll, and Susie cried:
“Oh, Uncle Wiggily! Please make Billie Wagtail and Floppy Twistytail
stop teasing us.” Suddenly the teasing animal boys ran in a circle
around Uncle Wiggily, laughing and shouting with joy.

[Illustration: THE ANIMAL BOYS TEASED UNCLE WIGGILY.]

[Illustration: Uncle Wiggily holding hands]

[Illustration: Fox scares Susie and Nannie]

Around the play house of Susie and Nannie the animal boys ran next.
“Oh, please go away!” begged Susie. “We can’t have any fun with
them here!” bleated Nannie. “Ha! I know what to do!” laughed Uncle
Wiggily. “I’ll take these boys to an ice cream store and let them eat
as much as they please.” “Come on, boys!” he called, twinkling his
pink nose. “Hurray! Hurrah! Hurroo!” shouted Billie, Floppy, Tommie
and Jackie, as Uncle Wiggily led them to the ice cream store. “I want
chocolate!” barked Jackie, standing on his head. “Well, you must not
tease the girls any more,” warned Uncle Wiggily, and the animal boys
promised not to. But, while the bunny gentleman was gone, the Fox and
Wolf crept up and frightened Susie and Nannie. “Oh, where is Uncle
Wiggily?” cried Susie. Suddenly the bunny gentleman hopped along with
his bag of clubs and golf balls. “I’ll scare the bad chaps away!”
shouted the rabbit.

[Illustration: UNCLE WIGGILY DROVE GOLF BALLS AT THEM.]

[Illustration: Elephant standing]

[Illustration: Elephant moves house]

“The Fox and Wolf will not bother you any more,” laughed Uncle
Wiggily as he sent the last golf ball flying toward the bad chaps.
“I banged them on their noses!” Nannie and Susie were glad, but
the goat girl said: “I’m afraid they might come back after you go,
Uncle Wiggily. Couldn’t you move our play house near your hollow
stump bungalow?” “No,” the bunny answered. “But wait a minute! I
have an idea!” Off hopped Uncle Wiggily until he met the kind circus
Elephant. “Will you please come and move a play house for me?” asked
the rabbit. “Right gladly,” replied the Elephant, standing on his
hind legs with his cap on his head. The big, strong elephant lifted
the play house up in his trunk. “Where do you want it?” he asked.
“Can you put it on your back?” inquired the bunny. “Yes, but tell the
animal girls to get inside the house,” spoke the Elephant. Susie and
Nannie hopped in and played with their dolls.

[Illustration: SUSIE AND NANNIE PLAYED WITH THEIR DOLLS.]

[Illustration: House on elephant]

[Illustration: Elephant picks up fox]

Up in the air the Elephant lifted the play house with Susie and
Nannie inside. “Oh, isn’t this fun!” bleated the goat girl. “The most
fun we ever had!” laughed Susie. Safely on his back the Elephant set
the play house. “Now the Fox and Wolf can’t get you,” said Uncle
Wiggily. “No, they can’t,” answered Susie. “But how can you get up
here, Uncle Wiggily” asked Nannie. “I’ll climb up on a ladder,”
replied the bunny. He put the ladder against the Elephant. But, as
Uncle Wiggily was climbing up, Susie cried: “Oh, here come the Fox
and Wolf back!” The Elephant laughed through his trunk. “Don’t let
them frighten you!” he rumbled. And when the Fox and Wolf came near
enough the Elephant picked them up, one after the other in his trunk,
and tossed them far, far away. Then the animal girls were happy. At
the end of the day the bunny put roller skates under the playhouse,
hitched his auto to it and hauled it away.

[Illustration: THE BUNNY HAULED THE PLAYHOUSE AWAY.]

[Illustration: Uncle Wiggily on dock]

[Illustration: Hippo and alligator talking]

Off in the greenwood among the hills was a lake of blue water. One
day the rabbit said to Nurse Jane: “Come! We shall take a ride on
the lake in my motor boat.” Uncle Wiggily dressed himself like a
sailor, and Miss Fuzzy Wuzzy, carrying her parasol, went with him to
the dock. “Oh, may I come with you?” squealed Floppy Twistytail the
piggie boy. “Let him come,” squeaked Nurse Jane. So Uncle Wiggily,
the muskrat lady and the piggie boy sailed over the blue lake in the
bunny gentleman’s motor boat. Now on shore were two bad chaps—the
Heavy Hippo and the Skillery Scallery Alligator with the double
jointed tail. “Let us catch Uncle Wiggily!” grunted the Heavy Hippo.
“That will be fun!” rumbled the ’Gator. “We can swim to the island
where they will land, and catch them there.” Uncle Wiggily, Nurse
Jane and the piggie boy sailed to an island in the lake. On the
island they played a game of baseball. Oh, what fun!

[Illustration: ON THE ISLAND THEY PLAYED BASE-BALL.]

[Illustration: Hippo near boat]

[Illustration: Uncle Wiggily in boat]

After the ball game Uncle Wiggily said: “It is time we sailed on
again.” The piggie boy grunted: “When do we eat?” The bunny twinkled
his pink nose and answered: “You shall soon have something to eat,
Floppy.” Just then, from where he was hiding in the water near
Baseball Island, up rose the Heavy Hippo. “Here is where I eat now!”
grunted the Heavy Hippo. “I’m going to nibble Uncle Wiggily’s ears!”
But the bunny was too quick! “Come on!” cried Mr. Longears. He caught
Nurse Jane by one paw, and Floppy by the other, and, leaping from
the island, jumped as far as he could. Uncle Wiggily stepped on the
Hippo’s back and from there into the motor boat with the muskrat lady
and piggie boy. “Oh, what a surprise!” howled the Hippo! On puffed
the motor boat until Nurse Jane saw another island. But Miss Fuzzy
Wuzzy did not know that the ’Gator and Hippo had swam there and were
having lunch on this second island.

[Illustration: THE GATOR AND THE HIPPO HAVE LUNCH.]

[Illustration: Alligator pulls boat]

[Illustration: Hippo has his mouth open]

“Let us stop there,” said Nurse Jane, as Uncle Wiggily steered the
boat toward the second island. “Are we going to eat soon?” the piggie
boy asked. “I’m ashamed of you—wanting to eat all the while, Floppy!”
spoke Nurse Jane. Floppy blushed red behind his ears and grunted:
“Well, I’m hungry!” By this time the ’Gator and Hippo, eating lunch
on the island, had seen the motor boat coming. “You had better let
me catch Uncle Wiggily,” bellowed the ’Gator. “All right!” grunted
the Hippo. The Alligator swam off under water and caught in his teeth
the anchor rope on Uncle Wiggily’s boat. “This time they shall not
get away!” rumbled the Hippo. “I’ll hold my mouth wide open and the
’Gator will pull the boat and Uncle Wiggily right in where I can
nibble his ears.” On swam the ’Gator pulling the boat toward the big
mouth of the Heavy Hippo which opened wider and wider. Nurse Jane
gave Uncle Wiggily a hatchet, crying: “Cut the rope!”

[Illustration: “CUT THE ROPE,” CRIED NURSE JANE.]

[Illustration: Uncle Wiggily cuts rope]

[Illustration: Hippo bites alligator]

“Where did you get this hatchet?” asked the bunny. “I brought it to
cut kindling wood with if we built a camp fire,” answered Nurse Jane.
“But don’t ask questions! Cut the rope!” Uncle Wiggily raised the axe
and brought it down on the anchor rope, one end of which was in the
’Gator’s mouth. “Zip!” snapped the rope. “Now we are free!” cried
Nurse Jane. “But the ’Gator is swimming away with Uncle Wiggily’s
rope and anchor!” squealed Floppy. “Let him go!” laughed the bunny.
“He doesn’t know we are loose. He thinks he is still pulling us,
and he’ll swim right into the Hippo’s mouth.” That is just what the
’Gator did! The Hippo closed his mouth and nipped the Alligator!
“Wowzie Zow!” howled the ’Gator. The sharp anchor tickled the Hippo’s
tongue and the Hippo sneezed. But Uncle Wiggily, Nurse Jane and
Floppy were saved, and this is the end of the story. But there will
be more stories in another book like this.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF UNCLE WIGGILY, THE BUNNY RABBIT GENTLEMAN WITH THE TWINKLING PINK NOSE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.