Age of Anxiety

                         By ROBERT SILVERBERG

                       Illustrated by SCHOENHERR

                     "Choose!" said the robonurse.
                  "Choose!" echoed his entire world.
                   But either choice was impossible!

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                          Infinity June 1957.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


That morning, when Larry awoke, the robonurse was standing at the foot
of his bed, smiling benignly. It made no attempt to help him into his
housecoat and give him his morning unworry capsule. Instead it waited,
poised delicately on its humming treads, making no motion toward him.

"I'm awake," Larry said sourly. "Why aren't you functioning?" He
paused, frowning slightly, and added, "And where's my capsule?"

"This morning is different," said the robonurse. "This is your
birthday, young man!" It clicked twice, hissed, and rolled forward at
last, holding Larry's capsule-box in its grips. The box flew open as
the robot approached Larry's bed, and the boy saw, within its gleaming
interior, _three_ capsules--one the usual light blue, the other two a
harsh green and a bright yellow respectively.

"What's this?"

"_Choose_," the robonurse said inexorably.

The trigger-word echoed in the room for an instant. "_Choose_," the
robot said again, and the repetition unlocked a chain of synapses,
unleashed data hypnotically buried in Larry's mind years before, opened
doors and brightened dark corridors.

_Choose._ The terrifying word held promise of conflict, pain, anxiety.
Larry's fingers quivered with terror for a moment; his hand hovered
over the capsule-box, wavered for a long second of indecision, while a
glistening bead of sweat rolled down his smooth face.

His hand grazed the light-blue capsule, the capsule that could end the
sudden nightmare forever. He fingered its glossy surface for a moment,
then shook his head and touched the bright yellow one. A shudder of
fear ran through him as he did so, and he swept up the green capsule
hurriedly and swallowed it.

"Okay. I've chosen," he said weakly.

The robonurse, still smiling, closed the capsule-box and rolled away.
It replaced the box on its shelf and said, "You've chosen, Larry--but
all you've chosen is postponement of final decision."

"I know." His voice was dry. "I--I'm not ready yet. But at least I took
a step forward. I didn't take the unworry drug."

"True enough," the robonurse said. "You can still go in either
direction--back to the unworry of childhood, or on to the full anxiety
of adult life."

"Let me think," Larry said. "That's why I took the middle capsule. To
think this out."

"Yes, let him think!" Larry glanced up and saw the stooped figure
of his father at the door of the bedroom. The robonurse scuttled
away hummingly, and Larry swung around in bed. His father's face,
wrinkle-etched, baggy-eyed, and despairing, stared intently at him.

The tired face broke into a feeble grin. "So you've arrived at the Age
of Anxiety at last, Larry! Welcome--welcome to adulthood!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Behind Larry lay an entire seventeen-year lifetime of unworrying--and
behind that lay the three centuries since Koletsky's development of the
unworry drug.

It was tasteless, easily manufactured, inexpensive, and--despite its
marvelous properties--not permanently habit-forming. Adults under the
influence of the unworry drug found themselves free from anxiety,
from nagging doubts about the future, from any need to worry or grow
ulcers or to plan and think ahead. Koletsky's drug made them completely
irresponsible.

Naturally, the drug was highly popular among a certain group of adults
with low psychic resistance to panaceas of this sort, and for a while
the unworry drug was a considerable source of worry to those still
clear-eyed enough to look ahead. Hundreds of thousands of people a year
were yielding to the synthetic bliss of the unworry drug, returning to
childhood's uninvolvement with the world.

Naturally, one of the remaining worriers invented an anti-unworry
drug--and with that, a new social alignment came into being. The new
tablet provided gradual weaning from the unworry drug; it took four
years for the treatment to be completed, but once so treated a person
could never bring himself to touch the Koletsky drug to his lips
again. There was an inflexible guarantee against back-sliding built
into the bonded hydrocarbons of the drug.

This second discovery left the world in possession of two remarkable
phenomena: a soothing drug and its antidote, both of 100% efficiency. A
new solution now presented itself--a solution whose details were simple
and obvious.

_Give the drug to children._ Let them live in a carefree paradise of
unworry until the age of seventeen--at which time, apply the four-year
withdrawal treatment. At twenty-one, they were ready to step into the
adult world, unmarked by the horrors of childhood and equipped to face
maturity with a calm, if somewhat blank mind.

At the age of seventeen, then, a choice: forward or backward. One out
of every ten elected to remain in the synthetic dream-world forever,
thereby removing themselves from a world in which they probably would
not have been fit to contend. It was an efficient screening process,
eliminating those dreamers who would not have withstood the grind,
who would have retreated from reality anyway, would have slipped into
neurotic fancies. The remaining ninety per cent chose maturity and
reality--and anxiety.

The light-blue capsule was the way back to dreamland; the bright yellow
one, the first step in withdrawal. The third capsule was the one most
frequently chosen. It was a delayer; its effect, neither positive nor
negative, was to allow its taker's hormones to remain suspended during
the period of choice.

"I've got three days, don't I, Dad?" The terms of the situation,
implanted in each child's mind long before he could possibly understand
the meanings of the words, now stood out sharply in Larry's mind.

Larry's father nodded. "You took the green one?"

"Yes. Was that wrong?"

"It's what I did when I was your age," the older man said. "It's the
only sensible thing to do. Yes, you have three days to make up your
mind. You can go on taking the unworry capsules for the rest of your
life--or you can begin withdrawing. You'll have to decide that for
yourself."

Something fluttery throbbed in the pit of Larry's stomach. It was the
first sign of worry, the first agony of decision-making. He remained
calm; despite his lifelong use of Koletsky's drug, its peculiar
properties were such that he felt no need of it now.

Yet--how did he choose? In three days, how? Uneasily, he wiggled his
feet against the cool, yielding surface of the floor for a moment,
left the bed, crossed the room, threw open the door. Across the hall,
the robonurse was ministering to his younger brother. The sleepy-eyed
eight-year-old was sitting up in bed while the pseudomother washed and
dressed him.

Larry smiled. His brother's face was calm, relaxed, confident-looking.

"The lucky devil," he said out loud. "He's got nine years of happiness
left."

"You can have the rest of your lifetime, son."

Larry turned. His father's voice was flat, without any hint of emotion
or any trace of value-judgment.

"I know," Larry said. "One way--or the other."

       *       *       *       *       *

Later that first day, he dressed and left the house. He crossed the
pedestrian-walk that led from his block to the next, feeling curiously
impermanent in his between-status status.

The pedestrian-walk was empty except for a wandering vendor struggling
along under a load of bubble-toys. Larry doubled his pace and caught
up with the man, a short, long-nosed individual with worry-creases
furrowing his thin face.

"Hello, son. Got your bubble-ship yet?" He held forth the inflatable
vehicle and smiled--a forced, slick smile that faded when the vendor
noticed the luminescent armband that told of Larry's status. "Oh--a
Changer," the vendor said. "I guess you wouldn't be interested in a
bubble-ship, then."

"I guess not." Larry took the toy from the vendor's hand anyway, and
examined it. "You make these yourself?"

"Oh, no, not at all. I get them from the Distributory." The vendor
scowled and shook his head. "They keep cutting down my allotment all
the time. I don't know how I'll stay in business."

"Why? Won't there always be a market?"

"There must be something new out," the vendor said gloomily. "The young
ones just aren't interested in bubble-toys these days. Things were good
last year, but--" he frowned dismally--"they're getting worse all the
time."

"Sorry to hear that," Larry sympathized. He felt vaguely disturbed--the
bubble-toys were vastly popular among his friends, and it was upsetting
to learn that the vendor was doing so badly. "I wish I could do
something for you."

"Don't worry about me, son. You've got your own problems now." The
vendor smiled bleakly at him and turned off the pedestrian-walk into
the side-road that led to the Playground, leaving Larry alone.

_Those were strange words_, he thought. He revolved them in his mind,
getting used to their feel. _You've got your own problems._ He looked
around, at the neat, clean suburb with its attractive little ten-story
units and carefully-spaced splotches of green garden, and shook his
head. _Problems. To be or not to be._ It was a line from an old play he
had found taped in his father's library.

The play had made no sense to him at the time, but now it troubled him.
He made a mental note to ask his father about it, some time in the next
two days, and walked on. He wanted to see as much as he could of the
adult world, before it was time to decide which he preferred.

       *       *       *       *       *

The City was a maze of connected buildings, redoubled avenues, tangled
byways and confusing signs. Larry stood in the heart of the business
district, watching the grownups zoom past him, each walking alone, face
set determinedly as he pursued some private mission.

"Move along, boy," someone said roughly. Larry glanced around, saw a
man in uniform scowling at him. The scowl softened into something like
pity as the man noticed the badge of Larry's status. Hastily, Larry
walked on, moving deeper into the web of the City.

He had never been here before. The City was someplace where fathers
went during the day, during the pleasant hours of school and
Playground, and from which fathers came, grimy and irritable, in the
evening. Larry had never considered going to the City before. Now it
was necessary.

He had no particular destination in mind. But after seventeen years in
the unworrying world, he would simply have to investigate the world of
anxiety before making up his mind.

A car buzzed by suddenly, and he leaped to one side. Out here in the
City, cars ran right next to the pedestrian-walks, not on flying
skyways above them. Larry hugged the side of a building for a moment,
recovering his calm.

Calm. Stay calm. Make a cool, objective appraisal.

But how?

Nine out of ten people picked this world. Larry ran his fingers over
the rough brick of the building, and felt the tension beginning to
curdle his stomach. Nine out of ten. _Am I the tenth? Am I going to
decide to go back to a lifetime of unworry?_

It seemed so. This dirty, hypertense, overcrowded place seemed
boundlessly undesirable. The choice was obvious.

But still....

He shook his head. After a moment of complete unthought, he let go of
the side of the building and took a few hesitant steps forward. He was
really frightened now. Suddenly, he wanted to be home, wanted to know
again the smooth placidity of an unworried day.

He started to walk faster, then to run. After half a block, he stopped,
suddenly.

_Where am I running?_

He didn't know. He felt trapped, hemmed in, overwhelmed by despair.

_So this is the City? Sorry, I don't care for it._

"You're all alone, aren't you?" said a sudden voice from behind him.
"It's not wise, on your first day off the drug."

Larry turned. The man behind him was tall and narrow-shouldered, with
the pinched, baggy face of a grownup and a wide, sly smile. "Yes, I'm
all alone," he said.

"I thought so. I can tell a Changer when I see one, even without the
armband."

Larry glanced down at his arm quickly and saw that the identifying
armband was gone. Somehow, somewhere, he must have ripped it off. He
looked at the stranger, and in a hoarse voice asked, "What do you want?"

"A companion for a drink," the stranger said affably. "Care to join me?"

"No--I--all right," Larry said with a firmness that surprised himself.
"Let's go have a drink."

       *       *       *       *       *

The alcohol stung his mouth, and the flavoring in the drink tasted
rancid, but he put the whole thing down and looked across the table at
the stranger.

"I don't much like that drink," he said.

"Not surprising." The other grinned. "It's one of our favorites."

"_Our?_"

"City people, I mean. Ulcer people. We gobble the stuff up. Not
surprising you don't like it."

Larry touched his forefingers lightly together. "I don't think I'd ever
like it, no matter how long I tried to get used to it."

"Oh?" The stranger's left eyebrow rose slightly. "_Never?_"

Larry shook his head. "Or the rest of the City, for that matter." He
sighed. "I don't think I'm the City type. I think I'm going to give the
whole thing up and go back home. The City isn't for me."

"Have another drink," the stranger said. "Go on--I'll pay. It'll take
your mind off your problems."

"There's a capsule that'll do it a lot more efficiently," Larry said.
"I don't need bad-tasting drinks to ease my mind."

"You're definitely cashing in your chips, then?"

"What?"

"I mean, you're definitely choosing Koletsky for life, eh?"

Larry paused a while, letting the images of the City filter through his
mind again. Finally he nodded. "I think so. I really do."

"Two full days more--and you've made up your mind?" The stranger shook
his head. "That'll never do, son. You'll have to think more deeply."

"How deep do I have to think?"

"Tell me what anxiety is," the stranger countered.

Taken aback by the sudden and seemingly irrelevant question, Larry
blinked. "Anxiety? Why--worry, isn't it? Fear? Ulcers and headaches?"

The stranger shook his head slowly and dialed another drink. "Anxiety
is the feeling that things are too good, that you're riding for a
fall," he said carefully. "It's a sense of things about to get worse."

Larry remembered the bubble-vendor and nodded. "But they have to be
pretty good to start with, don't they?"

"Right. You've got to have something pretty good--and be worried
that you're going to lose it. Then you fight to keep it.
Challenge--response. That's anxiety. Fear's something different. Then
you creep into the corner and shake. Or you hang onto the side of a
wall."

"I think I'll take another drink," Larry said thoughtfully.

"You get what I mean? Anxiety pushes and prods you, but it doesn't make
you shrivel. You've got to be strong to stand up under it. That's how
our world works."

"So?"

"You haven't experienced any real anxiety yet, boy. Just fear--and
you're reacting out of fear. You can't judge your response to something
if you're really responding to something else."

Larry frowned and gulped his drink. It tasted a little better, this
time, though only imperceptibly so. "You mean I'm deciding too quickly,
then? That I ought to look around the City a little longer?"

"Yes and no," the stranger said. "You're deciding much too
quickly--yes. But looking around the City won't do. No; go back home."

"Home?"

"Home. Go back to your Playground. Look there. Then decide."

Larry nodded slowly. "Sure," he said. "Sure--that's it." He felt the
tension drain out of him. "I think I'll have one more drink before I
go."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Playground was crowded on the second day of Larry's three-day
period. Small children played happily near the shimmering wading pond,
older ones gathered for games in the playing-field farther on, and, far
in the distance, a group of permanent unworriers sat complacently in
the sun, neither thinking nor moving. Humming robonurses threaded here
and there through the Playground, seeing to it that no one got into any
trouble. They were necessary, of course--because the unworried children
would have no fear of leaping from a tree head-first or walking into
the path of a speeding baseball.

Larry stood at the edge of the Playground, leaning against the
confining fence, watching. His friends were there--the boys he had
played with only two days before, still happily occupied with their
games and their bubble-toys. Walking carefully, in order not to be
seen, he skirted the side of the playing area and headed for the green
fields where the Permanents were.

There were about a hundred of them, of all ages. Larry recognized a
former playmate of his--a boy of about nineteen, now--and there were
older men, too, some well along in middle age. They sat quietly,
unmoving, most of them, smiling pleasantly.

Larry entered the field and walked to the nearest bench.

"Mind if I join you?"

The man on the bench grinned. "Not at all. Sit right down, friend."

Larry sat. "You're a Permanent, aren't you?" he asked suddenly.

A shadow seemed to cross the man's face. "Yes," he said slowly. "Yes,
I'm a Permanent. Who are you?"

"I'm Changing," Larry said.

"Oh."

The Permanent studied him idly for a moment or two, then leaned back
and closed his eyes. "It's nice here," he said. "The sun's warm."

Larry frowned. "What do you do when it rains?"

"We go indoors," the Permanent said.

"Look! I think it's starting to rain now!" Larry pointed at the bright,
cloudless sky. "There'll be a terrible thunderstorm any minute!"

"The robonurses should be here, then."

"Yes!" Larry said. "Where are they? Why aren't they here?"

"They'll be here," the Permanent said blandly.

"I don't think so. I don't think they're coming. They're going to let
you get wet."

The Permanent shrugged. "They wouldn't do that," he said.

"Of course not," a new voice said.

Larry glanced up, startled. The copper-alloy face of a robonurse looked
down at him. He goggled confusedly.

The robonurse's grips seized his shoulders gently. "You'll have to
leave here, boy. We can't have you disturbing these people."

Larry stood up. "All right," he said. "I'll go." He had seen all he
needed to see.

       *       *       *       *       *

The stranger in the City had been right, Larry thought, as he made his
way back to his home. The place to look had been in the Playground. He
_had_ seen something even more frightening than the City.

His father was waiting for him as he entered.

"Well?"

Larry sat down heavily in a pneumochair and knit his hands together.
"I've seen the Playground," he said. "Yesterday the City, today the
Playground. What's left to see?"

"You've seen it all, son."

Larry studied his father's pale, harried face for a moment. "I thought
the City was pretty horrible. I decided yesterday I'd become a
Permanent."

"I know. Your Watcher told me."

"Watcher?"

"You know--the man who took you in for drinks. You don't think I'd let
you go into the City alone, do you?"

Larry smiled. "I _thought_ it was too neat, the way he met me and sent
me back. But--but--"

He looked up helplessly at his father. "Today I saw the Playground,
Dad. And I don't know what to do." His voice trailed off indistinctly.

"What's the trouble, son?"

"Tomorrow I have to make my choice. Well, the Playground seems to be
out--they turn into vegetables there--but am I ready for the City?"

"I don't understand, Larry."

"I was sickened by the place." He leaned forward and said, "Dad, why
are children raised on the unworry drug?"

"We try to spare you," his father said. "Seventeen years of
tranquility--it's good, isn't it?"

"Not when it ends. It's the worst possible preparation for a life
in your world, Dad. I'm not ready for it--and I never will be! My
childhood hasn't taught me how to worry!"

Suddenly, his father began to chuckle, first deep in his stomach, then
high up in his throat, a ratchety, rasping laugh.

"What's the matter?" Larry asked angrily. "What's so funny?"

"You say you don't know how to worry? Why, you're practically an
expert at it!"

"What do you mean by that?"

"Suppose you tell me what you've been thinking of, the past two days.
Everything."

Larry stood up, walked to the door. The robonurse was waiting in the
next room, patient, unmoving. After a moment, he turned to his father.
"Well--I've been thinking that I don't like the City. That I'm afraid I
wasn't properly prepared for it. That I think raising me on the unworry
drug robbed me of any chance I'd have to learn to stand the strains of
City life. That even so I don't like the Playground either, and I'm
caught between." He checked each item off on his fingers. "That--"

"That's enough, Larry. You've analyzed it nicely."

Slowly, the truth opened out before him and an embarrassed grin widened
on his face. Resistance to strain could be acquired overnight--by nine
out of ten. Nine out of ten didn't need a long, grueling childhood to
prepare them for adulthood; the tenth would never grow up anyway.

"I've _been_ worrying," he said. "I'm the worrying kind. I've been
worrying since yesterday, and I didn't even know it!"

His father nodded. Larry took the capsule-box from its shelf, opened
it, stared at the three different kinds of capsule inside. "There never
really was any choice after all, was there?"

"No. Your choice was made yesterday morning. If you didn't have the
stuff for City life, you'd have grabbed for the unworry capsule the
second you saw it. But you didn't. You stopped to make a decision--and
won your citizenship right then and there. You proved it to us--and by
fighting with yourself over the decision you thought you still had to
make, you proved it to yourself."

Larry's smile spread. "Sure. The ability to worry is the measure of
successful City life," he said. "And I'm a regular worry wart already."
The excitement of the past two days still thumped in his stomach--and
it was only the beginning. "I belong _here_. Why--it won't be long
before I'll get my first ulcer!"

His father was radiant with paternal pride. "Welcome to your heritage,
son--the heritage of the civilized man. You've got the makings of a
first-rate citizen!"




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AGE OF ANXIETY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.