American Ideas For English Readers.




  [Illustration: JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL,
                   AFTER THE BUST BY
               WILLIAM ORDWAY PARTRIDGE.
                 (TAKEN FROM THE CLAY)]




  American
  Ideas
  For
  English Readers


                                 By
                        James Russell Lowell


                        With Introduction by
                             Henry Stone


                                                Published by
                                           J, G, Cupples Co,
                                            250 Boylston St.
                                                      Boston




                           Copyright, 1892,
                           BY J. G. CUPPLES.

                        _All rights reserved._




                               Contents.


INTRODUCTION                                             vii

BEFORE THE EDINBURGH PHILOSOPHICAL INSTITUTION             1

BEFORE THE LONDON CHAMBER OF COMMERCE                      9

AT THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE                            15

ON ROBERT BROWNING                                        21

AT THE UNVEILING OF THE GRAY MEMORIAL                     25

BEFORE THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WORCESTER          33

ON INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION                              39

AT A ROYAL ACADEMY DINNER                                 47

AT THE STRATFORD MEMORIAL FOUNTAIN PRESENTATION           57

AT THE DINNER TO AMERICAN AUTHORS                         63

BEFORE THE LIVERPOOL PHILOMATHIC SOCIETY                  81




Introduction.


Among his many titles to the special consideration and gratitude of his
countrymen, James Russell Lowell had one in pre-eminence--an unyielding
loyalty to all that was best in American ideas and aims. It was this
quality that gave point to the wit of Hosea Biglow, and loftiness to
his imagination in his more serious poems. In the earliest of the
Biglow papers, he calls upon Massachusetts to

   “Hold up a beacon peerless
    To the oppressed of all the World,”

and the tone is not changed to his very latest utterance. In that
Commemoration Ode, which will remain the crown of his literary and
poetical work, his passion found its highest expression:

   “O Beautiful! My Country! * * *
    Smoothing thy gold of war-dishevelled hair
    O’er such sweet brows as never other wore
           *       *       *       *       *
    What words divine of lover or of poet
    Could tell our love--and make thee know it
    Among the Nations bright beyond compare?”

An impression has prevailed--and has gained credence at some times
and in some places, that, in his later years, and in the presence of
a society differently organized from that which he found at home, the
ardor of his love of country was quenched:--that he became less an
American as he saw more of other lands. What is it to be an American?
The definition may vary, in different regions. What was it, always,
with him? If to be an American means merely to be successful in a large
and worldly way--whether in politics, or in business, or in letters; to
out-talk, out-spend, out-bid, out-invent others; to drive faster; to
travel farther; to push harder; to build bigger houses; to found more
richly endowed Universities; to construct greater Observatories; to
establish more and larger public libraries:--if to do these and similar
things is all that goes to make an American--the charge is true. In
such sense, Mr. Lowell was not so good an American as some others.
But, in the larger and truer sense:--in striving for all that goes to
make a people more noble in aim, more humane, more intelligent, more
peace-loving, more free, more self-respecting, more artistic, in short
more fully men and women of the best type,--Mr. Lowell may well be
accepted as the representative American, of whom we should all be proud.

It was his rare fortune to be Minister of the United States to Great
Britain during a most interesting period. The serious troubles which
had grown out of the wrong we had suffered at her hands during the
civil war had been happily ended. The era of reconciliation had begun.
In what light should we stand before the world, after winning the
great verdict in the Alabama case:--as a community of sharp traders,
condoning a great national wrong for a petty sum of money?--or as a
people striving chiefly for the maintenance of the true principles
of national honor and international comity? Mr. Lowell, perhaps more
than any one in America, was the man who, by training, by culture,
by scholarship, by attainments in the world of letters, by unsullied
character, was fitted to present to the English people an embodiment of
Americanism, in its best expression. More than that:--he was eminently
fitted to illustrate that idea, and give it weight, dignity and
authority. In all his intercourse with the aristocratic representatives
of privileged countries, he--the plain, untitled representative of a
democratic government--proud to stand for a people with whom liberty
and equality were supreme terms--more than held his own in every trial
of intellect, of courtesy, of wit, of all that wins in society and the
world. So, at last, no circle was complete without him:--to claim him
as guest was matter of emulation.

Some of these things are, in a certain sense, of small account. Yet in
a society so largely conventional as all diplomatic society is, and
of necessity must be, it is much that an American should, by common
consent, stand at the head, even in matters of ceremonial. It reveals
a quickness and versatility of mind which is not common. A certain
native, spontaneous grace, both of words and manner, characterized all
Mr. Lowell’s utterances; and it was so truly genuine that it could not
fail to charm, when the mere external imitation was sure to repel.

The record which this little book gives of his unstudied speeches
and letters in England shows how thoroughly imbued he was with the
American idea. It also shows how strenuously he used every occasion to
try to bring about a higher and truer friendship between the two great
countries whose mission it seems to be to uphold and extend regulated
liberty throughout the world. Some of these speeches were made while
he was still accredited Minister to Great Britain: others, after he
had ceased to hold the title, though he remained in reality the true
American representative to that people. There is, perhaps, no other
instance of a citizen of the United States holding such position, with
ever increasing regard, for years after he had ceased to be titular
representative. The honors bestowed on him by the Universities were
more than out-done by the honor in which he was held by the people.
The one was a tribute to scholarship and attainments:--the other, a
recognition of manhood and integrity.

In the heroic years which made up so large a part of the experience
of all men in the United States from 1861 to 1865, Mr. Lowell’s part
was as efficient as that of many a general on the battle field. When
the era of peace and reconciliation came, he maintained the same lofty
principles which had prompted all his former actions and words. The
spirit which dictated “The Present Crisis” so long ago as 1845, also
dictated the “Fourth of July Ode” in 1876. But how different the tone
of these two impassioned lyrics! The one a vigorous, manly, resistless
protest against the

   “Sons of brutish Force and Darkness
    Who have drenched the earth with blood,”

The other, a sublime thanksgiving for the salvation of

   “The Land to Human Nature dear.”

It is in the light of these strenuous outbursts of the unconquered
spirit of independence that his words spoken in lighter vein are to be
read and considered. Everywhere is the same faith and hope:--only, in
these later speeches, they find expression in words fitted for social
pleasantry and genial intercourse.

Nowhere do after-dinner speeches--which, with us, are usually
momentary and evanescent in effect--carry so much weight as in
England. There often a public dinner is an event. Questions of peace
or war: of party policy: of methods of administration: of national
destiny, are often decided or directed by words spoken at the dinner
table. Therefore, these speeches of Mr. Lowell have a much greater
significance than if made on similar occasions with us. In every
one is to be found an earnest endeavor, first to secure a higher
appreciation of his country than he found prevailing among that insular
and self-contained people:--and next to encourage and stimulate the
formation of a real and sincere friendship between the mother country
and her over-grown child. He gained these ends by the exercise of
unfailing tact, courtesy and courage, which first disarmed criticism;
and then by presenting considerations which commanded respect and
carried conviction. Even his American humor gained the appreciation of
these lovers of _Punch_.

The first of the speeches which are here given was made in 1880--the
last in 1888. One invariable note is struck in them all. Beginning
with that at Edinburgh, he claims--what we all conceive to be
true--that the traditions of English freedom and English civilization
have not only been maintained, but also extended, among us: and he
refers, with evident and just pride, to the quick and intelligent
appreciation of Carlyle in America, long before he won recognition
in his own England. And, in his last speech, on the eve of leaving
Liverpool to return home, he dwells with great earnestness on the duty
laid on English-speaking races everywhere to carry with them the great
lessons of liberty combined with order.

In all these evidently unstudied and spontaneous expressions of
his permanent feeling and conviction, Mr. Lowell claims our hearty
consideration. His voice is everywhere and always loyal to his native
land, which he loved and honored: to freedom, which he held above all
price: to that liberty and civilization which it is the joint mission
of England and America to maintain to the uttermost. Difference of
methods between the two countries there may be: but the end to be
reached is the same. To help reach this, Mr. Lowell gave his best
energies. His words had a power beyond what he could have thought
possible. If there is now, in England, a clearer appreciation of
American ideas: less of that condescension which was once so evident
in foreigners: more readiness to see and to seek the best rather than
the worst in our modes of life and thought: a clearer understanding
that, at heart, we are one people--a very large share of that improved
condition is due to James Russell Lowell. The method of securing that
better understanding was--not by denying or ignoring certain manifest
short-comings or over-doings:--but by constantly holding up to the
world the best we had done, or striven to do:--and, more than all,
by illustrating it in his own person:--so that even our enemies were
compelled to confess that there must be some good in our land, if such
men as he were the

                      “New birth of our new soil.”

                                                       HENRY STONE.

  BOSTON,
  January 1, 1892.




American Ideas for English Readers.




I.

BEFORE THE EDINBURGH PHILOSOPHICAL INSTITUTION.


On Saturday evening, November 6, 1880, the directors of the Edinburgh
Philosophical Institution entertained Mr. JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL,
American Minister, at dinner in the Balmoral Hotel in that city. Dr.
W. Smith, senior vice-president of the institution, occupied the
chair, and among others present were the Earl of Rosebery, Lord Reay,
Principal Sir Alexander Grant, the Rev. Professor Flint, and Professor
Blackie. Mr. LOWELL, in returning thanks for the toast of his health,
said:

     He thought that they in America had done quite their share
     of work in their short life, although he was always
     inclined to question the statement that they were a young
     people. It was supposed, somehow or other, that they
     were autochthonic; that they had sprung from the earth
     of America, as the Athenians were said to have done from
     the soil of Attica. But it was nothing of the kind. If he
     might be allowed to say so, they began where those in this
     country left off. It must be remembered that they took with
     them all the traditions of English freedom and of English
     civilization, and that they not only maintained them, but,
     in his humble judgment, carried them further. (_Cheers._)

Mr. LOWELL concluded by referring to early association on his part with
Edinburgh.

Afterwards, proposing “The health of Mr. Carlyle and the Philosophical
Institution of Edinburgh,” Mr. LOWELL said that--

     America in a certain sense performed the office of
     posterity to England and Scotland. Their authors were
     first recognized across the Atlantic. (_Cheers._) He would
     not say it was owing to quicker perception, but rather to
     their clearness of atmosphere (_laughter_) that they had
     this luck sometimes. He remembered particularly a book
     which was published while he was still at college, and
     which produced in his young mind as great a ferment as it
     did among all his contemporaries. That book was “Sartor
     Resartus.” (_Cheers._) It was first collected and published
     in the year 1836 in the city of Boston, in the United
     States of America (_cheers_); and it there received its
     first approbation. Their chairman, Dr. Smith, had told
     him during the course of the evening that when “Sartor
     Resartus” first began to appear in _Fraser’s Magazine_
     the editor received two letters, one from an Irishman,
     if he was not mistaken, saying that if that particular
     kind of stuff--describing it with what usually began with
     a “d” (_laughter_)--was to be continued he wished his
     subscription to be stopped. The other letter was from an
     American, saying that if the writer of “Sartor Resartus”
     in _Fraser’s Magazine_ had written anything else he wished
     it all to be sent to him. (_Laughter._) The second writer
     was a man he knew well--Ralph Waldo Emerson. (_Cheers._)
     He remembered being very much struck many years ago with
     something which Thackeray said to him. It was that Carlyle
     was his master. That was said nearly thirty years ago. The
     other day he took up a number of the _Nineteenth Century_,
     and in an article by Mr. Ruskin he observed that he said
     Carlyle was his master. This coincidence, the difference
     between Thackeray and Ruskin being remembered, only showed,
     he thought, the universality of Carlyle’s influence.
     (_Cheers._) He meant to say that Carlyle approached
     different men on different sides, which was one of the
     strongest marks that could be mentioned of genius. Carlyle
     had found an approach to their intellects and to their
     hearts, to the intellects and hearts of a great variety
     of men of different nations. He had introduced a new
     style--a peculiarly English style--of looking at things,
     quite as much as Sir Walter Scott introduced a new style
     of novel-writing. Sir Walter Scott, he considered, was the
     greatest story-teller of the age. (_Cheers._) Carlyle had
     the surprising gift of expressing poetic thought in prose.
     (_Cheers._) It was particularly their gratitude to him on
     the moral and human side that they would feel in drinking,
     not only with enthusiasm, but with a sort of reverence,
     the health of Mr. Carlyle.

The toast was received with much enthusiasm. Other toasts followed.


                                   ✠




II.

BEFORE THE LONDON CHAMBER OF COMMERCE.


The second annual dinner of the London Chamber of Commerce, which was
incorporated in 1881, was held on the evening of January 29, 1883,
in the Cannon-street Hotel, the Right Hon. H. C. E. Childers, M. P.,
Chancellor of the Exchequer, in the chair. The company, which numbered
about 180, included representatives not only of the great commercial
communities of London and all the most important of our colonies, but
of the English-speaking race in every part of the world.

On the chairman’s left sat the Hon. J. RUSSELL LOWELL, D. C. L., United
States Minister.

In proposing “The Chambers of Commerce of the United Kingdom and of the
Whole World,” he said:

     MR. CHAIRMAN, MY LORDS AND GENTLEMEN,--I was a few moments
     ago discussing with my excellent friend upon the left what
     a diplomatist might be permitted to say, and I think the
     result of the discussion was that he was left to his choice
     between saying nothing that had any meaning or saying
     something that had several--(_laughter_); and as one of
     those diplomatists to whom the Under Secretary for Foreign
     Affairs alluded a short time ago I should rather choose the
     latter course, because it gives one afterwards a selection
     when the time for explanation comes round. (_Laughter._)
     I shall not detain you long, for I know that there are
     speakers both on the right and on the left of me who are
     impatient to burst the bud; and I know that I have not
     been selected for the pleasant duty that has been assigned
     to me for any merits of my own. (_Cries of dissent._)
     You will allow me to choose my own reason, gentlemen. I
     repeat, I have not been chosen so much for my own merits
     as for the opportunity afforded you of giving expression
     to your kindness and good feeling towards the country I
     represent--(_cheers_)--a country which exemplifies what
     the colonies of England may come to if they are not wisely
     treated. (_Laughter and cheers._) Speaking for myself and
     for one or two of my compatriots whom I see here present,
     I should certainly say that that was no unpleasant destiny
     in itself. But I do not, nor do my countrymen, desire that
     those great commonwealths which are now joined to England
     by so many filial ties should ever be separated from her.

     I am asked to-night to propose the “Chambers of Commerce of
     the United Kingdom and of the World,” and I might, if the
     clock did not warn me against it--(“_Go on_”)--if my own
     temperament did not stand a little in the way--I might say
     to you something very solemn on the subject of commerce.
     I might say how commerce, if not a great civilizer in
     itself, had always been a great intermediary and vehicle
     of civilization. I might say that all the great commercial
     States have been centres of civilization, and centres of
     those forces which keep civilization from becoming stupid.
     I do not say which is the _post_ and which the _propter_ in
     this inference; but I do say that the two things have been
     almost invariably associated.

     One word as to commerce in another relation which touches
     me more nearly. Commerce and the rights and advantages
     of commerce, ill understood and ignorantly interpreted,
     have often been the cause of animosities between nations.
     But commerce rightly understood is a great pacificator;
     it brings men face to face for barter. It is the great
     corrector of the eccentricities and enormities of nature
     and of the seasons, so that a bad harvest and a bad season
     in England is a good season for Minnesota, Kansas and
     Manitoba.

     But, gentlemen, I will not detain you longer. It gives
     me great pleasure to propose, as the representative of
     the United States, the toast of “The Chambers of Commerce
     of the United Kingdom and of the Whole World,” with
     which I associate the names of Mr. C. M. Norwood, M. P.,
     vice-president of the Associated Chambers of the United
     Kingdom, and the Hon. F. Strutt, president of the Derby
     Chamber. (_Cheers._)


                                   ✠




III.

AT THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.


The University of Cambridge having under comparatively recent
regulations given archæology a definitely-recognized position among the
subjects for the Classical Tripos examination, has now advanced another
important step by establishing a suitable home for classical studies,
and under the same roof has provided a home for the antiquarian and
ethnological collections of the University. For the past eleven years
classical archæology has been systematically taught, but what was
previously carried on under difficulties has been since 1884 pursued
under advantageous circumstances. New buildings were formally opened
May 6, 1884, by the Vice-Chancellor. Brief addresses were made by the
Vice-Chancellor and Prof. Colvin. Mr. LOWELL then said:

     He also regretted with the Vice-Chancellor, both on his
     own account and on theirs, the absence of the French
     Ambassador, who could have spoken on archæological subjects
     from the position of a master. He had been asked to say a
     few words, and with sincerity he could say that it always
     gave him great pleasure to be the herald that brought to
     the old home a message from the new. That scarlet gown,
     which had suddenly converted him into a flaming minister
     (_laughter_), reminded him that Cambridge had adopted him
     as one of her children. (_Cheers._) He therefore felt
     charged to bring a message from the new Cambridge in
     the New World--a message of filial respect--to the old
     Cambridge in the Old World. There was also a propriety in
     his being there, from the fact that a great deal of the
     interest which had been felt in this undertaking had been
     stimulated by the lectures and the labors of a countryman
     of his own. Having said this, he might naturally be
     expected to take his seat, but he knew he was not expected
     to do so. He was compelled, like the Ancient Mariner, to
     go on with his story, whether he would or not. He often
     thought of the African and the monkey. The African had a
     notion that the monkey could speak if he would, but that
     he would not let anybody know he could, for fear he should
     be made to work. Now, he had to acknowledge a sort of
     prophylactic taciturnity. He had only one word which had
     some bearing on the subject. He was exceedingly interested
     in going through the museum, under the able guidance of
     Professor Colvin. The whole arrangement of it interested
     him. Each cast, almost from the rude fetish to the highest
     conception of the human brain and the human hand, was very
     striking. It was more than striking; it was most hopeful
     and encouraging. As he walked through the museum he could
     not help remembering that 60 years ago he saw in the museum
     at Boston some casts from the antique, and the ignorant
     delight which they first gave to his eye; he remembered
     also the education they gave to his eye as he grew older,
     and he should never forget that debt. These impressions
     were of greater value and much more operative when made
     early. He was struck, in going through the museum with
     Professor Colvin, with the vital relation between æsthetic
     archæology (if they would allow him to call it so), as
     represented in the museum, and Greek literature. It seemed
     to him that what one felt always when brought into contact
     with the work of Grecian hands or the production of the
     Grecian brain was its powerful vitality. By powerful
     vitality he did not mean merely the life in itself, but the
     vitality which it communicated. Here, it seemed to him,
     was the great value of being brought into more intimate
     relation with the Greeks. When he was looking that morning
     on the statue of Nikê, the original of which stands at
     the head of the great staircase in the Louvre, it seemed
     to him that it ought to be the figure of one who stood on
     the prow of the ship which brought the news of the victory
     of Salamis. It was not by any means certain, mixed race
     that we were, that the existence of a museum like that at
     Cambridge would not stir in some one an ancestral vigor,
     some hereditary quality or faculty that should make him
     into an artist.


                                   ✠




IV.

ON ROBERT BROWNING.


     The fashion of this world passed away, but the fashion
     of those things which belonged to the world of
     imagination--and it was most emphatically in that world
     that Mr. Browning had worked--endured and never passed. In
     1848 Mr. Browning said in a preface to a collection of his
     poems that many of them were out of print and of the rest
     a great number had been withdrawn from circulation, which
     implied that even at that time the size of his public was
     very small. But he had fully demonstrated that he stood
     in no need of a Browning Society to reinforce his native
     vigor, for, in spite of the indifference of the public, he
     had constantly gone on, from that time to this, producing
     and deepening the impression which he had made upon all
     thinking minds. It had been said that he had no sense of
     form, but this question depended upon the meaning to be
     attached to that word. One thing he thought was certain,
     and that was that men who had discussed form most, as for
     instance Goethe, had not always been the most successful in
     producing examples of it. Certainly no one with any sense
     of form could call “Faust” other than formless. If form
     meant the use of adequate and harmonious means to produce
     a certain artistic end, then he knew no one who had given
     truer examples of it than the great poet after whom that
     society took its name. He thought there was one danger in
     a Browning Society, which was that it might lead them to
     be partisans, and he thought he had seen some symptoms of
     it. They might be apt to insist upon people admiring the
     inferior work of the artist with his better work, and this
     he thought would be an evil. Every one who read Browning
     with attention, and who loved him, must at the same time
     admit that he was occasionally whirled away by the sweep
     and torrent of his own abundance. But after making these
     deductions, there was no poet who had given us a greater
     variety or who had shown more originality. Mr. Browning
     abided with them. He was not a fashion, nor did he belong
     to any one period of their lives. What they felt more
     clearly than anything else was his strength. He was of all
     others a masculine, a virile poet.


                                   ✠




V.

AT THE UNVEILING OF THE GRAY MEMORIAL.


The following address was delivered on the occasion of the unveiling of
the bust of the poet Gray in the hall of Pembroke College, Cambridge,
May 26, 1885:

     I have been asked to say a few words, but they must be very
     few, as the train is waiting for me that takes me back to
     keep an engagement. Mr. Gosse has told you he has been
     present at many memorial unveilings, and the newspapers
     inform me that I also have been present at the unveiling
     of perhaps too many. But never have I been present on any
     occasion with more pleasure than on this. You have now, in
     the words which Lord Houghton quoted, and which I would
     extend in a wider sense than he did, a beautiful memorial
     to Gray in permanent form. We also, thanks to Mr. Gosse,
     possess a photograph of this memorial in permanent form.
     But we have in our hearts and memories, I think, a memorial
     to the man quite as true and quite as permanent--that is,
     permanent for us. Very few words are fitting on an occasion
     which commemorates the one of the English poets who has
     written less and pleased more perhaps than any other. There
     is a certain appropriateness in my speaking here to-day. I
     come here to speak simply as the representative of several
     countrymen and countrywomen of mine who have renewed
     that affirmation, which I like always to renew, of the
     unity of our English race by giving something more solid
     than words in commemoration of the poet they loved. And,
     I think there is another claim which I perhaps have for
     speaking here to-day, and that is that the most picturesque
     anecdote relative to the life of Gray--perhaps the most
     picturesque related of the life of any poet, certainly of
     any English poet--belongs to the Western hemisphere; I mean
     the anecdote which connects the name of Wolfe with that of
     Gray. Nothing could have been more picturesque than the
     surroundings of that saying of Wolfe’s--of that English
     hero--and nothing could have been more momentous than the
     action and the consequence that followed from it, and which
     made the United States, which I have lately represented,
     possible. That, I think, gives me a certain right also to
     speak here.

     I know that sometimes criticisms are made upon Gray. I
     think I have often heard him called by some of our juniors
     “commonplace.” Upon my word, I think it a compliment. I
     think it shows a certain generality of application in
     what Gray has done, for if there is one thing more than
     another--I say this to the young men whom I see seated
     around both sides of the hall--which insures the lead in
     life, it is the commonplace. I have to measure my poets,
     my authors, by their lasting power, and I find Gray has a
     great deal of it. He not only pleases my youth and my age,
     but he pleases other people’s youth and age; and I cannot
     help thinking this is a proof that he touches on human
     nature at a great many periods and at a great many levels,
     and, perhaps, that is as high a compliment as can be paid
     to the poet. There is, I admit, a certain commonplaceness
     of sentiment in his most famous poem, but I think there
     is also a certain commonplaceness of sentiment in some
     verses that have been famous for more than 3000 years.
     I think that when Homer saw somebody smiling through
     her tears he said, on the whole, a commonplace thing,
     but it touched our feelings for a great many centuries;
     and I think that in the “Elegy in a Country Churchyard”
     Gray has expressed a simple sentiment, and as long as
     there are young men and middle-aged men, Gray’s poem will
     continue to be read and loved as in the days when it was
     written. There is a Spanish proverb which rebukes those
     people who ask something better than bread. Let those who
     ask for something better get something better than what
     Gray produced. For my own part I ask nothing better. He
     was, perhaps, the greatest artist in words that English
     literature has possessed. In conclusion, let me say one
     word for myself. This will probably be the last occasion on
     which I shall have the opportunity of addressing Englishmen
     in public; and I wish to express my heartfelt gratitude for
     the kindness which has surrounded me both in my official
     and private life, and to say that while I came here as a
     far-off cousin, I feel you are sending me away as something
     like a brother.


                                   ✠




VI.

BEFORE THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WORCESTER.


The following reply from the Hon. J. RUSSELL LOWELL to an address
presented to him by the Mayor of Worcester on behalf of the citizens
was read at the meeting of the Worcester Town Council on the evening of
June 2, 1885, and ordered to be recorded on the minutes:

     MR. MAYOR AND GENTLEMEN,--While I cannot but feel highly
     honored by the beautiful proof you have just given me that
     I am not forgotten by the ever-faithful city, I value
     even more the kindly sentiment which prompted it, and to
     which you have given such graceful expression. I am well
     aware that it is to what I represent far more than to
     any merit of my own that I owe this distinction, and that
     consciousness makes it doubly grateful to me. They who
     endured exile and danger and every form of hardship to
     found the great kindred commonwealth beyond the sea--and
     what that exile must have been they only can feel who
     know how beautiful and how justly dear was the land they
     left--took with them, not only such seeds as would bear
     good fruit for the body, but those also of many a familiar
     flower that could serve only as food for sentiment and
     affection. Yet the most precious gems of all were those of
     memory and tradition, that had the gift of fern-seed to go
     with them invisibly.

     They could not forget the land of their birth, nor can we,
     their descendants, forget the land of our ancestry. They
     fondly gave the old names to the new hamlets they were
     planting in the wilderness. The central county of my native
     State is a namesake of yours. It calls itself proudly the
     heart of the Commonwealth, and its beautiful chief city
     is Worcester. You knew how to touch a chord of tenderest
     association when, four years ago, you claimed me as of
     Worcestershire because my forefathers (the Lowells) had
     been so. You have been pleased, Sir, to say that I have
     done something to strengthen the good feeling between the
     two great households of the English family. I am glad to
     think that I in any way deserve this praise, for I look
     upon that good feeling as of vital interest to the best
     hopes and aspirations of mankind. I am sure that you will
     find my excellent successor animated by the same sentiment,
     and as happy as I have always been, while warmly loyal
     to the country that is and should be the dearest of all,
     to recognize ties of blood, of language, and of kindred
     institutions which make England the next dearest.

     As for me, Sir, the precious gift you have brought me,
     truly illuminated by its charming picture of buildings,
     some of them dear for their beauty, some because they
     recall your kindness or that of friends who have made me
     feel as if, when I went to Worcester, I was going home,
     is only another witness of that universal kindness (may I
     not say affection?) by which the land of my fathers has
     gone near to make me fancy that I was a son rather than a
     far-off cousin. As such it will always be justly dear to me
     and mine.

     Wishing continued prosperity to the city of Worcester, I
     remain, etc.,

                                               J. R. LOWELL.


                                   ✠




VII.

ON INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION.


A numerous deputation from the Workmen’s Peace Association, headed by
Mr. W. R. Cremer, waited on Mr. LOWELL, at the official residence in
Albemarle street, on the evening of June 6, 1885, for the purpose of
presenting to him an address preparatory to his leaving England for the
United States. Mr. LOWELL, in reply, said:

     I have been exceedingly touched latterly by the kindness
     which I have received here in England from all classes,
     but never have I been more profoundly touched than by the
     deputation that has now waited upon me to express the kind
     wishes of the English Workingmen. I have twice had the
     pleasure of addressing working men since I have been in
     England, and I have been gratified to find that, among
     all the audiences to whom I have spoken, there were none
     more intelligent. They were exceedingly quick to catch all
     points and exceedingly agreeable to talk to.

     You must not think that I have forgotten the part taken by
     the working men of England during our civil war--I won’t
     say on behalf of the North, because now we are a united
     people--on the side of good order and freedom; and on the
     only occasion when I had an opportunity of saying so--that
     was when speaking to the provincial press in London--I
     alluded to the subject. I agree with you entirely on the
     importance of a good understanding and much more between
     England and the United States, and between the two chief
     branches of the Anglo-Saxon race. I think you exaggerate
     a good deal of my own merit in relation to anything of
     that sort, but I have always had a feeling about me that
     a war between the two countries would be a civil war,
     and I believe a cordial understanding between them to
     be absolutely essential, not only to the progress of
     reasonable liberty, but its preservation and its extension
     to other races. (_Hear, hear._)

     It is a particular pleasure to me on another account to
     meet English workmen. I notice that, however ardent they
     may be in their aspirations and however theoretical on
     some points, they are always reasonable. The individual
     man may set the impossible before him as something to
     be obtained, but I think those communities of men have
     prospered the best who have aimed at what is possible.
     We see daily illustrations of that, and anybody who has
     studied the history of France would be convinced that,
     though England has a form of Government not so free as that
     country, yet you have made a greater advance towards good
     will among men and towards peace than France has done. I do
     not wish you to suppose that I am out of sympathy with what
     I call the French Revolution--although I consider it an
     enormous misfortune, which might have been prevented, and
     France saved from many evil consequences that followed--but
     the manner in which it took place we ought all to regard.

     Since I have been in England I have done something, I
     trust, to promote a cordial feeling between this country
     and the United States. That has been my earnest desire
     always, and I hope I have to some extent succeeded. You
     will allow me to thank you warmly for this address, which I
     shall always feel to be among my most precious possessions,
     and I shall carry to the workmen on the other side of
     the Atlantic the message expressive of your sympathy and
     hope. I hope the occasion will not ever arise even for
     arbitration. I think if we can talk together face to face
     we shall be able to settle all differences. I am certain
     that the relations between the two countries are now of
     a most amicable and friendly kind, and I am sure that my
     successor is as strongly impressed as I could be with the
     necessity of strengthening those friendly relations. I
     trust the necessity for arbitration may never arise between
     us; I do not think it will.

     You will again allow me to give you my most hearty and
     profound thanks for the kindness you have done me and to
     wish you all manner of prosperity. I trust also that that
     reign of peace to which you allude may come soon and last
     long. I appreciate extremely what Mr. Cremer said as to
     your sympathy with the Northern States in the Civil War,
     with whom no one could help sympathizing if they went to
     the root of the matter. I believe in peace as strongly
     as any man can do, but I believe also that there are
     occasions when war is less disastrous than peace; that
     there are times when one must resort to what goes before
     all law, and what, indeed, forms the foundation of it--the
     law of the strongest; and that, as a general rule, the
     strongest deserve to get the best of the struggle. They
     say satirically that God is on the side of the strong
     battalions, but I think they are sometimes in the right,
     and my experience goes to prove that.

[The address, engrossed on vellum, was afterwards transmitted to Mr.
LOWELL in America.]


                                   ✠




VIII.

AT A ROYAL ACADEMY DINNER.


On Saturday evening, May 3, 1886, the annual dinner of the Royal
Academy was held at Burlington House, the chair being occupied by the
president, Sir Frederic Leighton. On his right hand were the Prince of
Wales, and the Duke of Cambridge, Prince Christian, Prince Henry of
Battenberg, the Duke of Teck, the Lord Chancellor, and the Archbishop
of York; and on his left hand were Prince Albert Victor of Wales, the
Austro-Hungarian Ambassador, the Italian Ambassador, etc., etc.

Mr. LOWELL, in responding for “Literature,” said:

     YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESSES, MY LORDS, AND GENTLEMEN,--I think I
     can explain who the artist might have been who painted the
     reversed rainbow of which the professor has just spoken. I
     think, after hearing the too friendly remarks made about
     myself, that he was probably some artist who was to answer
     for his art at a dinner of the Royal Society (_laughter_);
     and, naturally, instead of painting the bow of hope, he
     painted the reverse, the bow of despair. (_Laughter._) When
     I received your invitation, Mr. President, to answer for
     “Literature,” I was too well aware of the difficulties of
     your position not to know that your choice of speakers must
     be guided much more by the necessities of the occasion than
     by the laws of natural selection. (_Laughter and cheers._)
     I remembered that the dictionaries give a secondary meaning
     to the phrase “to answer for,” and that is the meaning
     which implies some expedient for an immediate necessity,
     as for example, when one takes shelter under a tree from
     a shower one is said to make the tree answer for an
     umbrella. (_Laughter._) I think even an umbrella in the
     form of a tree has certainly one very great advantage over
     its artificial namesake--viz., that it cannot be borrowed
     (_laughter_), not even for the exigencies for which the
     instrument made of twilled silk is made use of, as those
     certainly will admit who have ever tried it during one of
     those passionate paroxysms of weather to which the Italian
     climate is unhappily subject. (_Laughter._) I shall not
     attempt to answer for literature, for it appears to me
     that literature, of all other things, is the one which
     is most naturally expected to answer for itself. It seems
     to me that the old English phrase with regard to a man in
     difficulties, which asks “What is he going to do about it?”
     perhaps should be replaced in this period of ours, when the
     foundations of everything are being sapped by universal
     discussion, with the more pertinent question, “What is he
     going to say about it?” (_“Hear, hear,” and laughter._) I
     suppose that every man sent into the world with something
     to say to his fellow men could say it better than anyone
     else if he could only find out what it was. (_Laughter._)
     I am sure that the ideal after-dinner speech is waiting
     for me somewhere with my address upon it, if I could only
     be so lucky as to come across it. (_Laughter._) I confess
     that hard necessity, or perhaps, I may say, too soft good
     nature, has compelled me to make so many unideal ones that
     I have almost exhausted my natural stock of universally
     applicable sentiment and my acquired provision of anecdote
     and allusion. (_Laughter._) I find myself somewhat in the
     position of Heine, who had prepared an elaborate oration
     for his first interview with Goethe, and when the awful
     moment arrived could only stammer out that the cherries on
     the road to Weimar were uncommonly fine. (_Laughter._)

     But, fortunately, the duty which is given to me to-night
     is not so onerous as might be implied in the sentiment
     which has called me up. I am consoled not only by the
     lexicographer as to the meaning of the phrase “to answer
     for,” but also by an observation of mine, which is that
     speakers on an occasion like this are not always expected
     to allude except in distant and vague terms to the subject
     on which they are specially supposed to talk. Now, I have
     a more pleasing and personal duty, it appears to me, on
     this my first appearance before an English audience on my
     return to England. It gives me great pleasure to think
     that in calling upon me, you call upon me as representing
     two things which are exceedingly dear to me, and which
     are very near to my heart. One is that I represent in
     some sense the unity of English literature under whatever
     sky it may be produced (_cheers_); and the other is that
     I represent also that growing friendliness of feeling,
     based on a better understanding of each other, which is
     growing up between the two branches of the British stock.
     (_Cheers._) I could wish that my excellent successor here
     as American Minister could fill my place to-night, for I
     am sure that he is as fully inspired as I ever was with
     a desire to draw closer the ties of friendship between
     the mother and daughter, and could express it in a more
     eloquent and more emphatic manner than even I myself could
     do,--at any rate in a more authoritative manner.

     For myself I have only to say that I come back from my
     native land confirmed in my love of it and in my faith in
     it. I come back also full of warm gratitude for the feeling
     that I find in England; I find in the old home a guest
     chamber prepared for me and a warm welcome. (_Cheers._)
     Repeating what his Royal Highness the commander-in-chief
     has said, that every man is bound in duty if he were not
     bound in affection and loyalty to put his own country
     first, I may be allowed to steal a leaf out of the book of
     my adopted fellow-citizens in America; and while I love my
     native country first, as is natural, I may be allowed to
     say I love the country next best which I cannot say has
     adopted me, but which I will say has treated me with such
     kindness, where I have met with such universal kindness
     from all classes and degrees of people, that I must put
     that country at least next in my affection. (_Cheers._)
     I will not detain you longer. I know that the essence of
     speaking here is to be brief, but I trust I shall not lay
     myself open to the reproach that in my desire to be brief
     I have resulted in making myself obscure. (_Laughter._) I
     hope I have expressed myself explicitly enough; but I would
     venture to give another translation of Horace’s words, and
     say that I desire to be brief, and therefore I efface
     myself. (_Laughter and cheers._)


                                   ✠




IX.

AT THE STRATFORD MEMORIAL FOUNTAIN PRESENTATION.


The memorial fountain presented to Stratford-on-Avon by Mr. George W.
Childs, of Philadelphia, was inaugurated Monday, October 17, 1887. Mr.
JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL sent the following letter:

     I should more deeply regret my inability to be present at
     the interesting ceremonial of the 17th were it not that my
     countrymen will be more fitly and adequately represented
     there by their accomplished Minister, Mr. Phelps. The
     occasion is certainly a most interesting one. The monument
     which you accept to-day in behalf of your townsmen
     commemorates at once the most marvellous of Englishmen
     and the jubilee year of the august lady whose name is
     honored wherever the language is spoken, of which he was
     the greatest master. No symbol could more aptly serve this
     double purpose than a fountain, for surely no poet ever
     poured forth so broad a river of speech as he, whether he
     was the author of the “Novum Organum” also or not. Nor
     could the purity of her character and example be better
     typified than by the current that shall flow forever from
     the sources opened here to-day. It was Washington Irving
     who first embodied in his delightful English the emotion
     which Stratford-on-Avon awakes in the heart of the pilgrim,
     and especially of the American pilgrim, who visits it.
     I am glad to think that this memorial should be the gift
     of an American and thus serve to recall the kindred blood
     of two great nations, joint heirs of the same noble
     language and of the genius that has given it a cosmopolitan
     significance. I am glad of it because it is one of the
     multiplying signs that those two nations are beginning to
     think more and more of the things in which they sympathize
     and less and less of those in which they differ. A common
     language is not indeed, the surest bond of amity, for this
     enables each country to understand whatever unpleasant
     thing the other may chance to say about it.

     As I am one of those who believe that an honest friendship
     between England and America is a most desirable thing,
     I trust that we shall on both sides think it equally
     desirable in our intercourse one with another to make our
     mother tongue search her coffers round for the polished
     rather than the sharp-cornered epithets she has stored
     there. Let us by all means speak the truth to each other,
     for there is no one else who can speak it to either of us
     with such a fraternal instinct for the weak point of the
     other; but let us do it in such wise as to show that it is
     the truth we love and not the discomfort we can inflict
     by means of it. Let us say agreeable things to each other
     and of each other whenever we conscientiously can. My
     friend, Mr. Childs, has said one of these agreeable things
     in a very solid and durable way. A common literature and a
     common respect for certain qualities of character and ways
     of thinking supply a neutral ground where we may meet in
     the assurance that we shall find something amiable in each
     other, and from being less than kind become more than kin.

     In old maps the line which outlined British possessions in
     America included the greater part of what is now territory
     of the United States. The possessions of the American in
     England are laid down on no map, yet he holds them in
     memory and imagination by a title such as no conquest ever
     established and no revolution can ever overthrow. The
     dust that is sacred to you is sacred to him. The annals
     which Shakspeare makes walk before us in flesh and blood
     are his no less than yours. These are the ties which we
     recognize, and are glad to recognize, on occasions like
     this. They will be yearly drawn closer as science goes on
     with her work of abolishing time and space, and thus render
     more easy that peaceful commerce ’twixt dividable shores
     which is so potent to clear away whatever is exclusive in
     nationality or savors of barbarism in patriotism.

               I remain, dear Mr. Mayor,
                          Faithfully yours,
                                    J. R. LOWELL.




X.

AT THE DINNER TO AMERICAN AUTHORS.


The dinner of the Incorporated Society of Authors, on July 25, 1888,
was given to the “American Men and Women of Letters” who happened to be
in London on that date. Mr. LOWELL spoke as follows:

     I confess that I rise under a certain oppression. There
     was a time when I went to make an after-dinner speech with
     a light heart, and when on my way to the dinner I could
     think over my exordium in my cab and trust to the spur of
     the moment for the rest of my speech. But I find as I grow
     older a certain aphasia overtakes me, a certain inability
     to find the right word precisely when I want it; and I
     find also that my flank becomes less sensitive to the
     exhilarating influences of that spur to which I have just
     alluded. I had pretty well made up my mind not to make
     any more after-dinner speeches. I had an impression that
     I had made quite enough of them for a wise man to speak,
     and perhaps more than it was profitable for other wise men
     to listen to. I confess that it was with some reluctance
     that I consented to speak at all to-night. I had been
     bethinking me of the old proverb of the pitcher and well
     which is mentioned, as you remember, in the proverb; and it
     was not altogether a consolation to me to think that that
     pitcher, which goes once too often to the well, belongs to
     the class which is taxed by another proverb with too great
     length of ears. But I could not resist. I certainly felt
     that it was my duty not to refuse myself to an occasion
     like this--an occasion which deliberately emphasizes,
     as well as expresses, that good feeling between our two
     countries which, I think, every good man in both of them
     is desirous to deepen and to increase. If I look back to
     anything in my life with satisfaction, it is to the fact
     that I myself have, in some degree, contributed--and I hope
     I may believe the saying to be true--to this good feeling.
     You alluded, Mr. Chairman, to a date which gave me, I must
     confess, what we call on the other side of the water “a
     rather large contract.” I am to reply, I am to answer to
     literature, and I must confess that a person like myself,
     who first appeared in print fifty years ago, would hardly
     wish to be answerable for all his own literature, not to
     speak of the literature of other people. But your allusion
     to sixty years ago reminded me of something which struck me
     as I looked down these tables.

     Sixty years ago the two authors you mentioned, Irving and
     Cooper, were the only two American authors of whom anything
     was known in Europe, and the knowledge of them in Europe
     was mainly confined to England. It is true that Bryant’s
     “Water-Fowl” had already begun its flight in immortal
     air, but these were the only two American authors that
     could be said to be known in England. And what is even
     more remarkable, they were the only American authors at
     that time--there were, and had been, others known to us
     at home--who were capable of earning their bread by their
     pens. Another singular change is suggested to me as I look
     down these tables, and that is the singular contrast they
     afford between the time when Johnson wrote his famous lines
     about those ills that assail the life of the scholar, and
     by the scholar he meant the author--

    Toil, envy, want, the patron, and the gaol.

     And I confess when I remember that verse it strikes me as
     a singular contrast that I should meet with a body of
     authors who are able to offer a dinner instead of begging
     one; that I have sat here and seen “forty feeding like
     one,” when one hundred years ago the one fed like forty
     when he had the chance. You have alluded also, in terms
     which I shall not qualify, to my own merits. You have made
     me feel a little as if I were a ghost revisiting the pale
     glimpses of the moon, and reading with considerable wonder
     my own epitaph. But you have done me more than justice in
     attributing so much to me with regard to International
     Copyright. You are quite right in alluding to Mr. Putnam,
     who, I think, wrote the best pamphlet that has been written
     on the subject; and there are others you did not name
     who also deserve far more than I do for the labor they
     have expended and the zeal they have shown on behalf of
     International Copyright, particularly the secretaries of
     our international society--Mr. Lathrop and Mr. G. W. Green.
     And since I could not very well avoid touching upon the
     subject of International Copyright, I must say that all
     American authors without exception have been in favor of
     it on the moral ground, on the ground of simple justice
     to English authors. But there were a great many local,
     topical considerations, as our ancestors used to call them,
     that we were obliged to take into account, and which,
     perhaps, you do not feel as keenly here as we did. But
     I think we may say that the almost unanimous conclusion
     of American authors latterly has been that we should be
     thankful to get any bill that recognized the principle of
     international copyright, being confident that its practical
     application would so recommend it to the American people
     that we should get afterwards, if not every amendment of
     it that we desire, at least every one that is humanly
     possible. I think that perhaps a little injustice has been
     done to our side of the question; I think a little more
     heat has been imported into it than was altogether wise. I
     am not so sure that our American publishers were so much
     more wicked than their English brethren would have been
     if they had had the chance. I cannot, I confess, accept
     with patience any imputation that implies that there is
     anything in our climate or in our form of government that
     tends to produce a lower standard of morality than in
     other countries. The fact is that it has been partly due
     to a certain--may I speak of our ancestors as having been
     qualified by a certain dulness? I mean no disrespect, but I
     think it is due to the stupidity of our ancestors in making
     a distinction between literary property and other property.
     That has been at the root of the whole evil.

     I, of course, understand, as everybody understands, that
     all property is the creature of municipal law. But you
     must remember that it is the conquest of civilization,
     that when property passes beyond the boundaries of that
     _municipium_ it is still sacred. It is not even yet sacred
     in all respects and conditions. Literature, the property
     in an idea, has been something that it is very difficult
     for the average man to comprehend. It is not difficult for
     the average man to comprehend that there may be property
     in a form which genius or talent gives to an idea. He
     can see it. It is visible and palpable, this property in
     an idea when it is exemplified in a machine, but it is
     hardly so apprehensible when it is subtly interfused in
     literature. Books have always been looked on somewhat as
     _feræ naturæ_, and if you have ever preserved pheasants you
     know that when they fly over your neighbor’s boundaries he
     may take a pot shot at them. I remember that something more
     than thirty years ago Longfellow, my friend and neighbor,
     asked me to come and eat a game pie with him. Longfellow’s
     books had been sold in England by the tens of thousands,
     and that game pie--and you will observe the felicity of
     its being a game pie, _feræ naturæ_ always you see--was
     the only honorarium he had ever received from this country
     for reprinting his works. I cannot help feeling as I stand
     here that there is something especially--I might almost
     use a cant word and say monumentally--interesting in a
     meeting like this. It is the first time that English and
     American authors, so far as I know, have come together
     in any numbers, I was going to say to fraternize when I
     remembered that I ought perhaps to add to “sororize.” We,
     of course, have no desire, no sensible man in England or
     America has any desire, to enforce this fraternization
     at the point of the bayonet. Let us go on criticising
     each other; it is good for both of us. We Americans have
     been sometimes charged with being a little too sensitive;
     but perhaps a little indulgence may be due to those who
     always have their faults told to them, and the reference
     to whose virtues perhaps is sometimes conveyed in a
     foot-note in small print. I think that both countries
     have a sufficiently good opinion of themselves to have a
     fairly good opinion of each other. They can afford it; and
     if difficulties arise between the two countries, as they
     unhappily may,--and when you alluded just now to what De
     Tocqueville said in 1828 you must remember that it was
     only thirteen years after our war,--you must remember how
     long it has been to get in the thin end of the wedge of
     International Copyright; you must remember it took our
     diplomacy nearly one hundred years to enforce its generous
     principle of the alienable allegiance, and that the
     greater part of the bitterness which De Tocqueville found
     in 1828 was due to the impressment of American seamen, of
     whom something like fifteen hundred were serving on board
     English ships when at last they were delivered. These
     things should be remembered, not with resentment but for
     enlightenment. But whatever difficulties occurred between
     the two countries, and there may be difficulties that
     are serious, I do not think there will be any which good
     sense and good feeling cannot settle. I think I have been
     told often enough to remember that my countrymen are apt
     to think that they are in the right, that they are always
     in the right; that they are apt to look at their side of
     the question only. Now, this conduces certainly to peace
     of mind and imperturbability of judgment, whatever other
     merits it may have. I am sure I do not know where we got
     it. Do you? I also sympathize most heartily with what has
     been said by the chairman with regard to the increasing
     love for England among my countrymen. I find on inquiry
     that they stop longer and in greater numbers every year in
     the old home, and feel more deeply its manifold charms.
     They also are beginning to feel that London is the centre
     of the races that speak English, very much in the sense
     that Rome was the centre of the ancient world. And I
     confess that I never think of London, which I also confess
     that I love, without thinking of that palace which David
     built, sitting in hearing of a hundred streams--streams
     of thought, of intelligence, of activity. And one other
     thing about London, if I may be allowed to refer to myself,
     impresses me beyond any other sound I have ever heard,
     and that is the low, unceasing roar that one hears always
     in the air. It is not a mere accident, like the tempest
     or the cataract, but it is impressive because it always
     indicates human will and impulse and conscious movement,
     and I confess that when I hear it I almost feel that I am
     listening to the roaring loom of time. A few words more.
     I will only say this, that we, as well as you, have
     inherited a common trust in the noble language which, in
     its subtle compositiveness, is perhaps the most admirable
     instrument of human thought and human feeling and cunning
     that has ever been unconsciously devised by man. May our
     rivalries be in fidelity to that trust. We have also
     inherited certain traditions political and moral, and in
     doing our duty towards these it seems to me that we shall
     find quite enough occupation for our united thought and
     feeling.


                                   ✠




XI.

BEFORE THE LIVERPOOL PHILOMATHIC SOCIETY.


The Hon. J. RUSSELL LOWELL, formerly the United States representative
at the Court of St. James, was the special guest on Wednesday night,
November 23, 1888, at a banquet of the Liverpool Philomathic Society,
held at the Adelphi Hotel, Liverpool. In response to the toast, “The
Guest of the Evening,” Mr. LOWELL, who met with a cordial reception,
referred at the outset to what he termed a rather pathetic incident of
his literary history. He said:

     It is connected, with the first volume which introduced
     me to the English public. It was not the “Bigelow Papers”
     or “Biglow Papers”--I beg pardon--(_laughter_), but it
     was a little volume of rather immature poetry which some
     enthusiast on this side of the water reprinted privately.
     He was good enough to send me a copy. Perhaps it is known
     to you that we have a protective system. (_Laughter_.)
     The book was accordingly liable to duty as coming to its
     author, and for the information of whomsoever it might
     concern there had been written on the outside “Value 6d.”
     (_Laughter_.) I laid it to heart at once, and I said to
     myself, “Here is a piece of criticism you can appreciate,
     and which, perhaps, may do you a great deal of good.”
     (_Laughter_.)

     As I was saying, I do not intend to make you any formal
     speech, and I should not have come here had it not been
     that I think it the duty of every man who can say anything
     that affects the people, whether by his pen or by his
     tongue, to go anywhere where expression is given to the
     friendly feeling which it is the desire of all wise and all
     honest men, I think, to deepen between the two countries
     which you and I represent. You have been good enough, Mr.
     President, also to refer to my career as a diplomatist in
     England, and you were quite right in saying that it was
     my endeavor to maintain those relations--those friendly
     relations--and I hope not without some success. (_Cheers_.)
     But I cannot listen to this compliment, I cannot accept
     it, without saying that I was followed by an American
     representative who has the same feeling, and who has
     represented America as ably in my judgment as she was
     ever represented in England. (_Cheers_.) That reminds me
     that we have been rather remarkably represented here in
     England. If you look over the list of our Ministers you
     will find that we have had three Adamses, one after the
     other, grandfather, father and son--one of the most really
     striking instances of heredity I know of (_laughter_); and
     the last Mr. Adams wore at the Court of Queen Victoria,
     as he told me, the regalia in which his grandfather was
     robed when he made his bow before George III. as the first
     American Minister in England, and was, I am bound to say,
     very civilly received by His Majesty. (_Laughter._) Those
     are only three illustrations, but we have many others.
     We have had Galitz, for instance, a prominent American
     diplomatist--though he was not an American by birth, but
     was a naturalized Swiss.

     There has been lately--I am not going to say a word about
     politics; I always rigidly avoid them--but I have seen a
     number of allusions in the newspapers lately to a certain
     tension, as the journalists like to call it, between the
     two countries. I cannot help thinking it is the result of
     a little irritation on both sides; but I have always felt
     that nothing was more foolish and that nothing ought to be
     more rigidly left to children than the “You’re another.”
     (_Laughter and cheers._) Now, I dare say metaphysically,
     you are another; but there are occasions when the telling
     one that he is “another” is apt to have a disastrous
     effect, and I think we ought to avoid it. (_Cheers._) When
     we look at the enormous extension of the race which speaks
     English (as we call it, for I am always desirous to avoid
     confining it to the English race, as we used to term it
     in our pride); when we consider this growth (though I do
     not quite agree with the figures of some of my friends,
     I do not believe we shall be a population of one hundred
     millions or two hundred millions so soon as is expected);
     when we consider this growth we find a remarkable fact,
     and one which no thoughtful man can help observing and
     reflecting upon. England is the greatest of colonizing
     races. This is a great distinction, and ennobles a nation.
     England has put a girdle of three prosperous and vigorous
     communities around the globe. Of course, it is not for me
     to say a word about Imperial federation. I am not sure
     Imperial federation would be a good thing. I am not sure,
     even if it were a good thing, it is not a dream. It is not
     for me to say; but it seems to me nobody who looks far
     can help seeing that the time may not be far distant when
     the good understanding among all these English-speaking
     people and their enormous resources may have great weight
     in deciding the destinies of mankind. (_Cheers._) Now, I
     am one of those who believe that civilization and freedom
     are better married than divided, that they go better
     together. Nobody who has studied history would say they
     do not exist apart, but it is in divorce, and each is the
     worse for it. (_Cheers._) The duty which has been laid upon
     the English-speaking races, so far as we can discover, has
     been to carry ever the great lessons of liberty combined
     with order. (_Cheers._) That is the great secret of
     civilization. We may have our different laws and different
     forms of government; but so long as we sympathize with any
     idea that so far transcends all geographical boundaries
     and all municipal limits as that, I think you will agree
     with me that nothing can be more important than to preserve
     the friendliest relations between the two greatest
     representatives of this conquering and colonizing race.
     (_Cheers._)

     I did not intend to detain you so long as I have (_cries of
     “Go on”_), but I have also in my experience of after-dinner
     speeches observed that a speech is like an ill-broken
     horse; it is apt to take the bit between its teeth and to
     bolt at the most unexpected moment. A speaker frequently
     brings up, not where he intended to bring up, but where
     his steed chooses to land him. I suppose that before
     coming here I ought to have studied carefully the history
     of Liverpool, with which I ought to have appeared to have
     been familiar from my earliest childhood. (_Laughter._)
     Unfortunately, there was no history of Liverpool in my
     friend Tom Brown’s library. (_Laughter._) There were
     histories of inferior places--Chester, and so on--but no
     history of Liverpool; and I therefore cannot give you a
     great deal of information which I have no doubt would have
     been new and very interesting to you, and which would make
     the staple of a proper after-dinner speech. But there is
     one thing I remember about Liverpool. I have always felt a
     sort of literary gratitude to Liverpool, strange as you
     may think it. In my father’s library I remember very well
     three quarto volumes stood side by side more years ago
     than I like to say. Two of these volumes were “Lorenzo the
     Magnificent,” and the other was “Poggio Bracciolini.” I,
     of course, when I was a boy, did not know precisely the
     meaning of those books; but they did to a certain extent
     afford me an introduction to the “Renaissance in Italy.”
     I thought--but Sir James Picton corrects me--that it was
     Roscoe who translated the life of the second Lorenzo; but
     it was his son, I am informed, who translated another book
     which gave me my first acquaintance with the Italian
     Novelists, and which was a book which I remember buying
     when I was making a library of my own very early in life.

     But to an American Liverpool generally represents the
     gate by which he enters the Old World; for as our
     ancestors went across West to find a new world there in
     that unexplored Atlantic, as they thought it might be,
     we go back Eastward to find our new world in the old--a
     new world of continental instruction and freshness. And
     I am glad, linked as we are in history and speaking, as
     I am given to understand, a language which at least can
     be understood the one by the other (_laughter_)--I am
     glad to find that my countrymen linger more and more in
     the land of their ancestors. Formerly Bristol was the
     great port through which intercourse with America was
     kept up, but now certainly Liverpool is one end of the
     three-thousand-mile loom on which the shuttles which are
     binding us all in visible ties more and more together are
     continually shooting to and fro. Liverpool is also the gate
     by which Americans leave the Old World to go home, and I
     am to a certain extent, as a person who crosses the seas
     not infrequently, interested in a discussion which I saw
     in the newspapers the other day as to the difficulties of
     embarcation at Liverpool. But I have encountered one which
     I did not expect, and that difficulty has been put in my
     way by the Philomathic Society. You have made it harder
     to get away from Liverpool than I should have expected
     or supposed, and I shall carry away with me when I go
     to-morrow the recollections of this pleasant meeting with
     you, of its cordiality, of the pleasant things that have
     been said to me, and that we often accept things that we do
     not deserve. (_Laughter and cheers._)


                                   ✠




_A Selection_ ...

... _from the Publications of_

[Illustration]




Transcriber’s Note:

Two misspelled words were corrected. Words and phrases in italics are
surrounded by underscores, _like this_.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMERICAN IDEAS FOR ENGLISH READERS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.