ÁCOMA, THE SKY CITY

LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

[Illustration: ÁCOMA MAIDENS AT THE SPRING

_Copyright by E. S. Curtis_]




                           ÁCOMA, THE SKY CITY

                    _A STUDY IN PUEBLO-INDIAN HISTORY
                            AND CIVILIZATION_

                                    BY
                         MRS. WILLIAM T. SEDGWICK

                              [Illustration]

                                CAMBRIDGE
                         HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
                                   1927

                             COPYRIGHT, 1926
                       BY HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS

                           _Second Impression_

                 PRINTED AT THE HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
                        CAMBRIDGE, MASS., U. S. A.




IN GRATEFUL AND LOVING MEMORY OF

MRS. CHARLES ELIOT GUILD

AND

ELEANOR GUILD


[Illustration]

        _But yet I treasure in my memory_
    _Your gift of charity, your mellow ease,_
        _And the dear honour of your amity,_
    _For these once mine, my life is rich with these._

[Illustration]

    _Because of your strong faith I kept the track_
    _Whose sharp-set stones my strength had well-nigh spent._
    _I could not meet your eyes if I turned back,_
                  _So on I went._




PREFACE


The attempt is here made to bring together, and put into a form for the
general reader, the story of that pueblo of the Keres people known as
Ácoma, so far as yet discovered in the records of Spanish diarists and in
those of more recent historical writers. It was one of the places visited
by the first white explorers of the region we know to-day as New Mexico.
From the very outset Ácoma excited the curiosity and even the fear of the
pioneers because of the strangeness of its position and the reputation of
its inhabitants for ferocity.

The early Spaniards made no prolonged stay there, but to “the marvellous
Crag” there are constant brief allusions from the time of Coronado’s
chronicler in 1540 onward to that of its conversion to Christianity after
1629.

Nor are there more vivid and thrilling tales told of any Southwestern
pueblo people than can be veraciously set forth of Ácoma, the City in the
Sky, built more than 6500 feet above sea-level.

The student of aboriginal legends and customs, after reading the many
monographs that have been printed about other Pueblo Indians, notably the
Hopi and Zuñi, is inclined at first to think himself fortunate to find
a field so little worked as Ácoma. Even Cochití and Laguna have opened
windows of understanding to the white investigator. One soon finds that
Ácoma has not been neglected, but that every one attempting to go beyond
the most superficial glance arrives at a wall as blank of entrance as
the ancient lower story of its own fortress dwellings. The ladders of
admission to its hatchways hardly give the stranger more than uncertain
glimpses here and there within the obscure interior, and these are so
fragmentary and elusive, often contradictory, that he can affirm little
about their ritual life—which is the core of tribal existence. Of all
Indians the Ácomas seem most resentful of intrusive questioning and most
unwilling to impart, even for purposes of record, any real knowledge
of themselves. Certain clans and rituals are already extinct. It has,
however, seemed worth while, before the old life has become something
less than a memory, overspun by all the vagueness of tradition, to bring
together into one small volume the substance of everything already
written about Ácoma. Such historical data as have come to light are
followed by a few legends and folk-tales—fairy tales perchance some of
them are—and then by the researches of scholars like Bandelier, Fewkes,
Parsons and Hodge.

It may be thought that the legitimate bounds of the subject as given in
the title have been too far exceeded. In explanation it is but fair to
state that since Ácoma is still well-nigh impenetrable to any foreigner,
the only way to apprehend its mental and spiritual development is to
use inferentially whatever seems permissible from related tribes. In
justification of this method I am happily supported by no less an
authority than the distinguished anthropologist, Dr. Kroeber, who writes:
“That the pueblo civilization was substantially the same in every town
has always been assumed; it begins to be evident that a great part of
it has been borrowed back and forth in the most outright and traceable
manner. The history of the cults and institutions of any one of these
people simply cannot be understood without a knowledge of the others. The
problem in its very nature is a comparative one, and until the pueblo
languages are more thoroughly understood there is no solution.”

Ácoma belongs to the most numerous of the six linguistic groups of the
Pueblo Indians, called the Keresan (Queresan), and shares with Laguna a
dialect differing somewhat from the rest of that “Nation.” Standing aloof
as these two do from the other Keresan villages, they nevertheless own
kinship with Sía, Santa Ana, Santo Domingo, San Felipe, and Cochití, who
all claim the famous Rito de los Frijoles for their ancestral home. The
researches of the best scholars find in the Ácoma ritual considerable
affiliation with the Zuñi, and rather less with that of the Tusayán
tribes of Arizona.

The writer makes no claim to be more than a compiler, but she has
endeavored not to include in the following pages the customs and beliefs
of any group of Indians which the scholars have not shown to be more
or less interwoven with those of Ácoma. In assembling these fugitive
accounts of the Sky City from diaries and archaeological notes, as well
as from appreciations of sympathetic visitors, she has hoped to lay a
foundation for some scholar of the future to build upon. The writer
has followed in the footsteps of genuine research, and she desires to
offer these pages to be used, like the toe and finger holes of the mesa,
chiefly as a guide to others to go further and to do the real work that
must be done soon if it is not to be forever lost.

The opportunity to collect and study these materials in the Bancroft
Research Library at Berkeley has been most cordially given to the
writer by Professor Herbert E. Bolton of the University of California.
My thanks are due also to Dr. Leslie Spier for much helpful suggestion
and criticism on the chapters dealing with the anthropology and native
customs of the Southwest. To Professor Bolton, the master-mind, whose
scholarship and insight are joined to a rare power of kindling in others
something of his own enthusiasm for historical research, and of setting
before them ideals of work which have broadened and deepened the world’s
knowledge of early American history, I wish to express my deep gratitude
for his never-failing encouragement and guidance.




CONTENTS


                     INTRODUCTORY

      I. Mesa Land                                  3

     II. The Citadel of Ácoma                      14

                       HISTORY

    III. First Expeditions from New Spain          51

     IV. The Battle in the Sky City                69

      V. Ácoma Rebuilt                             88

     VI. Father Ramírez at Ácoma                   97

    VII. Ácoma in the Pueblo Revolt               106

   VIII. The Wonder-Working San José              127

     IX. Ácoma and the Federal Government         134

            LEGENDS AND SOCIAL ORGANIZATION

      X. Origins and Migrations                   147

     XI. The Tradition of Katzímo and Ácoma       166

    XII. The Social Organization                  176

   XIII. Folk-Tales of Ácoma                      194

    XIV. Keresan Myths                            209

     XV. Religious Beliefs                        225

    XVI. Ceremonials and Rituals                  245

   XVII. Indian Games                             262

  XVIII. Pottery                                  272

         Appendix                                 289

         Bibliography                             301

         Index                                    311




ILLUSTRATIONS


All the illustrations but two are from photographs not hitherto
published. For the frontispiece, I am indebted to the well-known
photographer of Indian life, Mr. Edward S. Curtis. For the difficult
trail up Katzímo, to the courtesy of the Century Company of New York.

All the others were taken for this book by Professor Herbert E. Bolton
of the University of California, or were given him for my use by the
Reverend St. John O’Sullivan of San Juan Capistrano, California. To these
gentlemen the author extends her thanks for making the text more vivid.
The cover design is from a water-color done by Mr. Kenneth M. Chapman of
the Art Museum of Santa Fé, from an ancient jar of Ácoma potters, for
which the writer feels especial gratitude.

  ÁCOMA MAIDENS AT THE SPRING                                _Frontispiece_

  MESA-LAND                                                              4

  THE CARSON MONUMENT                                                    6

  WALPI IS UNIQUE. IT MUST BE PRESERVED                                 10

  KATZÍMO, OR THE ENCHANTED MESA                                        16

  THE SAND-RAMP, OR “NEW TRAIL”                                         18

  ÁCOMA, NORTH ROW                                                      20

  ÁCOMA, MIDDLE ROW                                                     20

  ÁCOMA MAN IN EVERYDAY DRESS                                           24

  ÁCOMA WOMAN ON HER HOUSE TERRACE                                      24

  THE LADDER-TRAIL                                                      28

  ÁCOMA “DOORWAYS”                                                      30

  THE TWO UPPER STOREYS, ÁCOMA                                          30

  GENERAL VIEW OF ÁCOMA PUEBLO                                          34

  THE CHURCH, ÁCOMA                                                     38

  A KISI IN A RIO GRANDE PUEBLO                                         40

  THE LONG LINE OF ÁCOMA, TWO MILES AWAY                                44

  MAP OF NEW MEXICO IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY                          52

  HÁWIKUH TO-DAY. FIRST OF THE SEVEN CITIES OF CÍBOLA                   56

  THE RUINED CHURCH OF HÁWIKUH                                          56

  THE STAIRCASE TRAIL AND THE CHURCH                                    60

  TO-YA-LA-NE                                                           66

  MODERN ZUÑI                                                           66

  FACSIMILE OF TITLE-PAGE OF VILLAGRÁ’S RHYMED HISTORY OF NEW MEXICO    70

  THE FORTRESS HOUSE OF ÁCOMA                                           78

  ÁCOMA, LOOKING NORTHWARD                                              88

  EL MORRO, OR INSCRIPTION ROCK                                        118

  INSCRIPTION OF DE VARGAS ON EL MORRO                                 118

  A NAVAJO HOGAN                                                       136

  THE PUEBLO OVEN                                                      140

  ON THE OLD TRAIL TO ZUÑI                                             160

  THE CLIFFS OF ÁCOMA; KATZÍMO IN THE DISTANCE                         166

  ASCENT OF THE GREAT CLEFT OF KATZÍMO, 1897                           172

  THE ILLIMITABLE DESERT                                               176

  THE INHERITED DANCE COSTUME                                          250

  ÁCOMA ON FEAST-DAY OF ST. STEPHEN, SEPTEMBER 2                       256

  PROCESSION OF THE DANCERS, ÁCOMA                                     260

  ÁCOMA GIRL RETURNING FROM THE RESERVOIR                              272

  THE GUARDIAN CLIFFS OF ÁCOMA                                         284

  MAP FROM NORDENSKIÖLD’S CLIFF-DWELLERS OF THE MESA VERDE   (_End-papers_)




ÁCOMA, THE SKY CITY




Chapter I

MESA LAND

    _The vision splendid of the sunlit plains extended_
    _And at night the wondrous glory of the everlasting stars._


The first effect of the desert upon any human being must be one of
surprise—surprise at the contrast between the preconceived idea which the
word suggests and its variety of beauty—a beauty which becomes for many
an irresistible fascination, a magnet that allures and brings its lovers
back again and again.

The simplicity of great spaces and great masses is one of the supreme
influences of life. Together with limitless vistas of possibility, there
is in them a serenity that brings calm and meditative repose.

However far the eye is carried in the desert of the Southwest, one is
never wearied by monotony. Everywhere the undulating sands, hardly held
in place by scanty vegetation when the winds blow their wildest, are
driven into long rippling waves, or into hillocks, by the Spaniards
called _lomas_. Even while you watch, this shifting, drifting sand takes
on many hues. Sometimes it is grey, or pale buff, or almost white, more
rarely golden. Out of it grows, here and there, the pungent greasewood,
the stunted cedar and the thorny, freakish cacti unfurling gay flags of
color to catch the wandering bee.

Cutting the horizon, barrier mountain ranges appear, whose long, restful
lines lend a new note of titanic power to the harmony; and every now and
again, rock-islands, solitary, abrupt, imposing, tell of other forces
silently working through untold ages and leaving behind forms beautiful
or merely fantastic. Of all the magnetic elements of the landscape these
are the most manifest. But the supreme thing, the over-powering glory, is
the majesty of light and the splendor of color that is so all-pervading,
all-enfolding in the desert that, before we are aware of it, we become
sympathetic with the belief of the indigenous race in sorcery.

[Illustration: MESA-LAND

_Bolton_]

In some far foretime the whole of this vast area was an inland sea. Sand
and wind in the long interval since the waters receded have done their
part in the task of erosion as effectually as do ocean waves beating
upon coast-wise cliffs.[1] The work of these elemental forces is uneven.
The softer rock has given way. That which is harder is left sculptured
into forms that everywhere invite the imagination. To many of them
descriptive names have become permanently attached. Such is Locomotive
Rock, lifted high above the road between Casa Blanca and Ácoma in
astonishing realism. Most extraordinary is the line of heads and trunks
of eleven colossal elephants that may be seen two miles away from Ácoma
toward its farm-lands. By wind and sand-blast they have been eroded from
the oyster-grey stone to such lifelikeness that fancy grows almost into
conviction that here we have the work of forgotten sculptors such as once
were bred in Egypt or Chaldæa. Forms like these, in solitudes like these,
lead to quick recognition of the source of anthropomorphic worship by
the sensitively alert mind of primeval man. Such a portentous figure as
that called the Kit Carson monument near Fort Defiance arrests the gaze,
bizarre and unlovely though it is. Carved by no human hands, it must have
seemed to untutored minds a thing supernatural.

In these high altitudes the clear, thin air brings exhilaration of spirit
and an unwonted sense of physical well-being that “scorns laborious days”
and banishes fatigue. True, at times one may be almost blinded by the
shimmering brilliance of “the colored air.” But because the vast stretch
of almost treeless earth acts everywhere as a reflector, it is indirect
radiation and the lack of shade, rather than direct heat, from which one
occasionally needs to seek shelter.

With night there comes an indescribably awesome silence—an isolation, an
infinity of separation from all one has ever known; but soon the eyes,
uplifted to “the floor of heaven thick inlaid with patines of bright
gold,” are soothed and quieted out of all alarm, and blessed sleep brings
unconsciousness to human spirits which may not too long hold converse
with divinity.

[Illustration: THE CARSON MONUMENT

NEAR FORT DEFIANCE

_Bolton_]

Three of us had spent days of incomparable interest and pleasure visiting
the chief monuments of Mesa Land, Zuñi and Tusayán; Inscription Rock[2]
with its autograph record of heroic adventurers; the Cañon de Chelly
and the Cañon del Muerto, where prehistoric pueblos are built, on rocky
shelves or in natural caves, so high above the wet floor of the river
that they look like toy villages. From the limitless champaign we had
seen solitary mesas lifted up like no other mountain architecture on
earth. They varied in size from little islands to great table lands ten
miles long and more. To the traveller’s surprise some of these “islands”
prove to be peninsulas. This was the case at Hopi. A raised topographic
map disclosed the fact that the three mesas (table lands) whereon were
built the Seven Cities of Tusayán (Hopi) in the dateless centuries before
the coming of Columbus, are really long, irregular fingers pushing out
from a single enormous plateau. They are separated from one another by
miles of sage-grown plain through which run deep washes, torn by violent
streams in periodic seasons of storm, but now as dry and empty of life
as extinct craters. The highest point, from which these fabled cities
rise in picturesque dignity, is only seven or eight hundred feet above
the plain; but we are told that on its farthest rim to the north, this
plateau drops a sheer three thousand feet. Long rocky tongues such
as these, high and rugged, difficult of access and therefore easily
defended, and, moreover, commanding far views of the deep, wide valleys
stretching between the highlands, offered to the agricultural Indian
a natural fortress of defense from his hereditary foe, who roamed the
plains whithersoever the hunting of the buffalo willed that he should go.

Like all the semi-desert country, the valley land seems level until you
begin to traverse it. Then the roughness and the strange uplifts and
hollows suggest a world still in the making, an emergence from chaos,
left but never conquered. But not all is desert. Much beautiful wooded
country lies scattered through the Navajo reservation on the way to Hopi
Land. On the high plateaus, tall pines and cedars, interspersed with a
lower growth of oaks, give the nomad Navajo ample room for his wandering
flocks and a hidden shelter for his solitary hogan (hut) whether it be
of adobe or of brushwood. No undergrowth obscures the long vistas through
the forest, but a carpet of luxuriant grass dotted with brilliant flowers
gives pasturage for the woolly flock that provides both clothing and
food for the Navajo. One of our keenest memories will always be of the
deliciously aromatic scent of cedar burning in these hogans. Rising like
incense through the limpid air, it suggested ancient smokes from primeval
altars, kindled by the torch snatched from the Fire-God by Coyote.

More pervading and far more magical than the spicy odor of the cedars,
was our consciousness of color throughout the land. Color, translucent,
evanescent, mysteriously light-irradiated color, everywhere! From the
high vault of heaven it came flooding down over the soft greys and buffs
of the sandstone mesas, broken by every tone of red, beautiful and
varied, running the whole gamut of salmon-pink, rust-red, and vermilion
to deep mahogany and royal porphyry. The tones blend, contrast, or are
thrown into sharp relief, against backgrounds of dark fir, or foregrounds
of that elusive silver of the sage, which is neither grey nor green. Such
tapestry of silver-green, covering as it does long rolling valleys and
low foothills of the plains, makes a restful foil to the more brilliant
and more solemn elements of the earth-picture.

The supreme effect upon the eye of such a palette is dependent, after
all, upon the crystalline quality of the light and the ever-changeful
and mysterious movement of cloud-shadows. Here one rediscovers for
himself the truth the artists taught us long ago, that purple is the
complement of yellow. The gold and buff of the soil and the ranges are
suffused by the lavenders, violets and deep purples in every shaded
cavern, through the wizardry of the over-arching heavens.

Thinking backward through the historic years, it is no surprise to find
how unlike each other are the types of Indians in this country. Those
tribes who, since an immemorial age, have roved and fought and won their
way through alertness of eye and limb, must have acquired physical and
mental variations, even if once they were evolved from the same stock as
the Indian of fixed dwellings and sedentary habits.[3]

To us the Navajo embodied our preconceived idea of the Indian. He is
tall, powerfully built, often handsome, with high cheek bones and an
impassive face—mask-like in its haughty, sometimes brutal, stillness.
Even in a dance that we watched, nothing stirred his expression. The
Navajo is to-day, just as in the elder time, a roamer, pre-eminently the
herdsman, so that it is rare to find even as many as two or three of his
hogans clustered near a watering place.[4]

The dweller in the pueblos seems almost like a being of a different race
from the man of the plains. Shorter of stature, he is more delicate of
frame. His hands and feet are noticeably small, as if adapted to the
prehensile method of scaling his precipitous cliffs by toe and finger
holes. Likewise he is gentler mannered, and his dignified reception of
the stranger suggests a hospitable response that at first raises hopes
of some genuine mutual confidence. But alas for hopes like these! All
too soon one realizes that he will impart no slightest inkling of the
meaning to him of his inherited tradition, his religious beliefs or his
present-day customs. One wonders whether, even if one could speak his
language, there would be any great gain, for the Indian is past-master
in adroit and civil dissembling, in the use of words and gestures that
beguile, but do not reveal the inner workings of his mind. Under “the
bitter lessons of contact with exploiting white” civilization, he has
become more secretive, so that his legends, his traditional ritual, and
his ancestral customs are fast disappearing. Swift must be the salvage if
all is not to be forever lost.

[Illustration: WALPI IS UNIQUE. IT MUST BE PRESERVED

_Bolton_]

An impressive example of such inevitable change may be seen at Walpi,
where there is in process of construction in the valley a new system of
irrigation and water supply which will abolish the painfully toilsome
task of carrying water from the foot of the mesa to the dwellings on its
summit. Inevitably the younger generation will abandon the no longer
needed rock of safety for a comfortable and easy existence in the valley
near their crops and herds.

Walpi must become a National Monument under federal protection. It is
unique. In situation it reminds the traveller of Castrogiovanni above the
Vale of Enna in Sicily or of Segovia in Spain, and it is no less worthy
of admiration.

Such is the strong and abiding contrast between the Indian of fixed
settlements, and the wanderer of the plains who at any day and hour may
strike his tent and silently take his way far afield leading his flocks
to greener pastures. A homeless gipsying life? Yet he sets up as easily
as if it were for always his little forge on which he beats out the
silver bracelets he knows the white man covets, or his loom whereon he
weaves the blankets that often bring large sums.

One thing the two types of Indian have in common. It is their belief that
after all these generations the white man has never proved that he has
a remedy for the ills of life half so good as that which their forbears
practised and have handed on for use to-day. They are unconvinced that
a rule of conduct more honest or more wise has been shown them even by
the religious teachers of the ruling people. Whether in medicine or in
morals, their ancients still are their guides and resolutely do they keep
inviolate the old prescription.

Sometimes our way crossed or followed ancient trails marked out by the
invading Spanish pioneers, who must have been amazed at the similarity
of this country to their mother land of Spain, and more particularly of
Aragón. Between Zuñi and Ácoma we were actually on the first path ever
trodden by the feet of white men in this Southwestern country. Then
were brought forth from the master’s brief-case precious, and as yet
unpublished, translations of old diaries.

Great was our excitement to learn that on these trails may still be
found the water holes so accurately described three centuries ago for
the guidance of those who should come after. Distances were so carefully
measured and noted that to-day they are affirmed to be correct by men
living in the region. Experiences such as these kept us all in an
enchanted atmosphere. We seemed like actors in an ancient story of
exploration rather than people surrounded by present-day events. As we
read these diaries upon the very route they detail, there seemed to
pass before our eyes in its integrity that strange company of soldiers
and priests, well armed and well mounted, followed by the crowd of
half-hypnotized, half-terrified natives. Little the Spaniards recked
of the hardships of the way; what they saw was Opportunity, Fortune,
denied them in the old world they had left. We felt again how, in the
virginal wilderness, lured forward by a vision of that “Beyond” where
lay a treasure of unstinted gold—gold of the field, gold of the unplumbed
rock, gold of souls saved from everlasting death—each man had been led
by his individual imagination and by the great general Hope, on and on,
undaunted, “to seek, to strive, to find, and not to yield.” Caught by the
glamour of the buoyant air, we, far-away inheritors of those “dreamers,
dreaming greatly,” realized how much our country owes to them, men of
an alien race and breed, in that along with their pursuit of material
gain, great ideals were held aloft. Lines of Kipling’s verse were borne
hauntingly on the breeze: “came the whisper, came the vision, came the
Power with the Need”.... “It’s God’s present to our nation. Anybody might
have found it, but His whisper came to”—Spain.




Chapter II

THE CITADEL OF ÁCOMA

    Ácoma is in point of site not only the most remarkable but the
    most ancient of New Mexico pueblos to-day ... a formidable
    cliff in an exceptional situation, a site isolated and
    impregnable to Indian warfare.—BANDELIER.


The citadel rock of Ácoma has always been one of the most conspicuous
points in New Mexico. For this reason it was mentioned with particular
definiteness by every one of the early Spanish chroniclers—Castañeda,
Espéjo, Oñate, Vetancur. Always aloof geographically and spiritually from
other pueblos, even its own “nation,” and likewise apart to-day from the
usual routes of travel, Ácoma lends a piquant interest to the visitor.
One wishes to know how much more of ancient tradition and usage have been
perpetuated here than in other settlements more accessible and in which
scholars have made extensive studies of native customs.[5]

The approach to Ácoma is quite unlike that toward either Zuñi or Hopi.
The Peñol, as the great rock is often designated, is situated about
sixty miles west of the Rio Grande and fifty miles almost directly east
of Zuñi. Laguna, nineteen miles to the northeast, is to-day the nearest
station on the railroad. From Laguna there is a choice of roads. One of
them passes through Casa Blanca, a farming village, by a winding and well
travelled way from which one sees the tufa rock eroded in many wildly
grotesque forms that invite the imagination. By another, hardly more than
a cart track, one goes across bare, rough country and drifting sands,
above which formidable mountain walls lift a barrier against the sky of
intense ultramarine blue. Here, where rabbit brush is more abundant than
anything else, is scant pasturage for the sheep and cattle that look up
wistfully at the traveller. A turn of this road brings rather suddenly
into view the mighty circular butte of Katzímo, popularly called the
Enchanted Mesa, rising out of the sunburned waste.

Under a late afternoon sun its precipitous walls and its sharply turreted
pinnacles stand forth in vivid tones of yellow and rose. It looks quite
inaccessible, in spite of great heaps of talus at its base. These do,
in fact, lend little aid toward any ascent, and no kindly zig-zag
“toe-and-finger trail” exists. On the southwest may be seen a cleft, as
vertical and glassy as the rest. Yet up this apparently unassailable wall
occasional ascents have been made by means of ropes—one, within a few
weeks of our visit, by two women and two men. Of the latter, one was an
Indian who declared to me that nothing would tempt him to venture again,
though it is much more likely that his reason was connected with the
sacredness of the place rather than with the difficulties of ascent.

From near this point we had our first sight of Ácoma. The rock island
rises from the austere plain almost as isolated to-day in all essentials
as when Alvarado first saw it in 1540 and regretted the effort it cost
his men to ascend the cliff—“well fortified, the best there is in
Christendom.”

Halfway between Katzímo and Ácoma one June afternoon we came upon a
picturesque group of Indians from Ácoma, both men and women, with many
horses and burros. It was a lucky circumstance for us that a watering
tank was in process of construction near the pueblo, since otherwise
almost all the populace would have been at the summer villages a dozen
miles away. The women, who had cooked the food for the men at noon,
were sitting about upon hillocks of fresh earth, adding color to the
landscape with their gay shawls. Our Laguna chauffeur was known to them
and spoke their language (Keresan). He vouched for our friendly interest,
and brought to us the governor, who spoke a little English, and the war
captain (_hócheni_), who spoke none. The latter was an older man, not
in working clothes, but wearing more ornamental paraphernalia. Friendly
enough they all seemed, and after payment of a fee for entrance to
the pueblo and for the privilege of taking photographs (according to a
printed formula that was shown us) we went on, confident that we should
get what we had come for. A gift of candy and “smokes” had brought smiles
to all their faces, and we parted hoping for further conversation in the
evening, when the workers returned to the pueblo.

[Illustration: KATZÍMO, OR THE ENCHANTED MESA

_Bolton_]

The nearer we drew to the great Crag, the more extraordinary was the
impression it made—a marvelous agglomeration of abrupt escarpments,
mighty pillars, and rugged cavernous clefts. You enter as it were upon
the precincts of an astonishing stronghold through a half-ruined gateway
of outstanding columns, broken by erosion but magnificent still in their
strength and dignity. Looking up, you are aware that the grey sandstone
walls above are not merely perpendicular but actually overhanging, and
are gashed and splintered into scores of crags of an indescribable
grandeur. Absorbed in the general picture, you think little at first of
the long, even line on the summit. It does of course indicate the blocks
of houses, which are so intimately a part of the cliff itself that an
approaching enemy must often have been deceived. Nursing the illusion
that this strangely carven rock is in truth some battlemented stronghold
of mediaeval time, we made our ascent over a long stretch of sand, and
then up the ancient “toe-and-finger-hole” trail in the rocks. At the
top we were met by women gracefully balancing on their heads trays of
fragile pottery. Quickly finding the one whom we sought, we asked if she
would be able to keep us over a night. With a grave inclination of her
head, but no word, she turned, and we followed till she paused before
ascending by a ladder to the third storey of the terraced house where she
lived. Leaving our small impedimenta for her to dispose of, we made our
first circuit of the pueblo. The quiet dignity and grave courtesy of our
hostess never forsook her, but they did not chill us; and while we were
with her we felt welcome to make ourselves as comfortable as we could.

Vetancur, the seventeenth-century chronicler, describes the mesa as “a
league in circuit and thirty _estados_ in height.”[6] Modern writers
estimate its height at 357 feet, and its irregular but practically
level top as seventy acres in extent.[7] The great rock is almost cut
in two by a savage cleft “like a pair of eye-glasses, a small saddle
representing the bridge.”[8] Sand in the course of time has drifted over
this dangerous bridge, and with disintegrated stone fallen in from either
side, there has been formed a narrow but treacherous passage, which we
were told the boys dare one another to cross, but where no man will risk
his neck. It will be convenient therefore to designate the two parts
hereafter by the terms “north” and “south” mesa. Although there are no
signs of human dwellings on the south mesa and no known tradition that
it was ever inhabited, Lummis writes of “a perfect cliff-house” perched
there on a dizzy eyrie.

[Illustration: THE SAND-RAMP, OR “NEW TRAIL”

_Bolton_]

When seen from below, the outer walls of the dwellings seem to be part
of the mesa itself, merely hewn from the solid rock. Closely approached,
they are found to be as much fortress as house. Three parallel lines
of stone and adobe, a thousand feet long and forty feet high, running
east and west, are separated from one another by _calles_ or streets of
moderate width—the _calle_ between the middle row and the south row being
left wider than the others, to provide a plaza for open-air ceremonials.

Each of these structures consists of three storeys built in terraces,
after a fashion common enough in the pueblo country. The lowest storey
is between twelve and fifteen feet high, and had originally no openings
save trap doors on its top. It was used exclusively for the storage of
supplies, enough of which could be kept there to withstand a long siege.
The Ácomas therefore enter their houses by ladders from the ground to
the second storey, but the third storey and the roofs are reached by
steep and narrow steps on the division walls.[9] In all terraced pueblos,
economy of construction was one feature of this type of house. A far more
important consideration was necessity for mutual defense, felt by every
small community exposed to raids. No one could foresee when would appear
a roving band of hostile Navajos, Apaches or Comanches, but their forced
tribute upon the crops at some time was as certain as the dawning of the
day.

Though in appearance these long blocks of apartments are community
houses, they are in no sense communal if that term be used to define
a socialistic form of life. Each family or clan is a unit completely
separated from every other by very solid division walls. Independence
of all but the immediate family or clan can hardly be carried to
a greater extreme than with the Indian. Injury or insult, even if
sometimes imaginary, may provoke tragic results. Silent and wary by
nature, and made suspicious by experience, the Indian is indifferent to
the well-being of his neighbor across streets as narrow as those that
separate the house-blocks of Ácoma, and he asks an equal privacy for
himself.

May this not explain, at least in part, certain contradictory information
gathered from different sources in the same pueblo, of which all
investigators complain?

[Illustration: ÁCOMA NORTH ROW

_Bolton_]

[Illustration: ÁCOMA MIDDLE ROW

_Bolton_]

The old town shows signs of decay. The western end of Middle Row is
now broken down, displaying the construction of the three storeys and
the method by which wooden _vigas_ (beams) are mortised into the adobe
walls. One of the _vigas_ was quite beautifully carved with the same
design we afterwards saw in another house, where it was partly hidden by
white-wash. We were told that these two decorated beams were taken from
the first church when it was destroyed, and that in earlier days the
half-ruined house had been the residence of the priest. Since at present
a priest comes from Laguna but twice in a year, it is evident that he
needs no permanent abode. Apartment-like as they look from without,
they are never connected inside. Within the houses you will find an
open hearth for warmth and cooking. In most houses there will be at one
end three corn-grinding troughs (_metates_) sloping like a washboard
in a tub. Kneeling behind them, a woman will use a small bevelled slab
of stone or lava, of the same material as the trough, with which she
crushes the grain, which then falls over the edge between the slabs, each
trough making the meal finer than the one before. It has been noted ever
since Castañeda’s day, that, if not observed by strangers, the women
always sing at their grinding. For several tribes the music for the
Corn-Grinding Songs has been written down.[10]

Outside the house, at fairly frequent intervals, are beehive-shaped
ovens where all the baking is done, except that of the “paper bread”
(_guayave_)[11] made from blue corn, which must be baked on very highly
polished flat stones. These stones, which receive an extraordinary
degree of care from the women, are placed upon a projecting part of the
fireplace directly over the blaze. The _guayave_ we saw was about the
color and texture of a hornet’s nest and tasted rather like popped corn.

It used to be true, in almost all the tribes, that men did all the
weaving and women made the baskets and the pottery, but to-day one hears
of women working at the loom. Though the men do all the heavy part of
house construction, including the carpentering, it is the women who build
the adobe walls, and do all the plaster work. The women make a game of
it, apparently, and show more gayety than at almost any other time,
whereas if a man were to be seen helping them in the very least, he would
be such a butt of ridicule to all his comrades chat it would amount to a
disgrace.

Once a year before the great festival, on September second, the inside
walls of the houses are freshly whitewashed. Against them are hung
buckskins and other garments, as well as guns, trinkets and the silver
necklaces made by their own artisans. Here, too, adding high color to
the motley array, are the dried fruits, the chilis, and jerked meats,
all hung from the beams, as a food supply for winter. At night wool
mattresses (_colchones_) are spread on the floors. By day they make
comfortable seats against the walls and are covered with gay blankets.

Few are the industries practised to-day by the Ácomas. Apparently they
get all cotton and wool material for their garments by barter. A system
of exchange has been reduced to specialization among many tribes, so
that, if the Navajos now make most of the blankets and silver trinkets,
this is no proof that other tribes are ignorant of these arts.

As a rule the Pueblo Indians can lay small claim to physical beauty,
though many photographs and modelled heads bear witness to the austere
and finely chiselled comeliness of individuals. The Indian of the pueblo,
though strongly built, is apt to be smaller in frame and shorter than
his kinsfolk of the nomad race. The coarse black hair is either worn
loose by the men, or is plaited in one or two queues and fastened with
bright-colored stuff of some kind. Those locks which fall over the
forehead are cut in a fringe even with the line of the eyes, and a red
_banda_ is worn fillet-wise, leaving the crown of the head uncovered.

The men as well as the women are extravagantly fond of ornament,
bedecking themselves with strings of wampum or of bright glass beads. We
found no surer way to gain their friendliness than to give them strings
of small shells, or the more prized abalones that were not too large to
be worn on the breast in time of festival. While the women also wear
bead chains, they are especially proud of their heavy silver necklaces
ornamented with pendants of the squash blossom (emblem of fruitfulness)
which are universally and significantly a part of the costume for
feast-days. One is reminded of a similar custom in Greece, where the
girls wear their dowry in embroidery, and necklaces made of gold chains,
at the Easter dances, often described as the “marriage market.”

The _fiesta_ dress of Ácoma has been so often described that it need
not be repeated here. We are told that from the eagle feathers on their
hair to the rabbit-fur anklets, and turtle-shell rattles below the
knee, all is still as it used to be. These picturesque costumes, costly
and elaborate, are hoarded and handed down for generations. After one
has witnessed a Corn Dance in an open plaza, one cannot restrain a sigh
of regret that so much of color and of harmony with the environing
scene has been lost to the daily life of a world grown drab and
over-conventionalized.

In the matter of dress the Indian is going through a transition period.
His native costume is fast disappearing, since the children, after being
put into American schools and given dreary American clothing, are apt
to feel conspicuous and uncomfortable if they return to the dress of
the pueblo. No one who has seen the blue and white checked uniform of a
reservation school can but regret this change. On ordinary days there
is little of the ancient dress to be seen at Ácoma. The women all wear
on the head a shawl or kerchief that falls in soft flowing lines to the
shoulder. From the shoulders hangs down the back a gay-colored square of
silk (called _utinat_) generally made still more lively by a contrasting
border. The dress may be of wool or of cotton in one piece worn over a
blouse with rather full sleeves. A belt embroidered in red and white
completes the costume. The older women wear the footless stocking or
the heavy white legging, tucked into buckskin moccasins. The half-grown
girls usually prefer American shoes and stockings and cotton gowns of the
simplest lines. The little children go barefoot, and are lightly clad
in one garment. Generally speaking, the men wear a nondescript medley of
blue overalls and a loose shirt open at the throat, supplemented by a gay
neckerchief. When to this is added some jewelled ornament like a precious
shell amulet, or the insignia of office, an embroidered belt, and a red
_banda_ filleted about the head, there is still something delightfully
quaint and picturesque about their appearance, though so much has
vanished.

[Illustration: ÁCOMA MAN IN EVERYDAY DRESS

_Fr. O’Sullivan_]

[Illustration: ÁCOMA WOMAN ON HER HOUSE TERRACE

_Fr. O’Sullivan_]

The first necessity of life to the Pueblos, after security from their
enemies was assured, was a sufficient water supply. No modern ideas of
sanitation have penetrated this community, and only the wonderful quality
of the air, so high and powerful in desiccation, can account for their
escape from epidemic disease. After the dwellings, the most striking
objects here are moderate-sized tanks placed at intervals along the
streets, filled with water for household use. On asking the source of
the water upon this arid and wind-beaten rock, one is told of two great
natural reservoirs[12] on the northern side of the mesa from which the
women bring upon their heads, in three-to five-gallon _tinajas_, all
the water needed for every purpose. Toward the close of day a beautiful
picture is made by women bearing aloft with perfect poise these great
ollas, or water jars. The reservoirs are large, and so dry is the air at
this great height that the water is always cool. I have been told of the
children skating on them in March. The larger of the two on the northern
side of the precipice we found emptied and scrubbed out, waiting for the
longed-for rains to fill it afresh. To our surprise we found the grey
rock was ruddy-hearted. The basin-floor was of a warm tone patterned by
nature like a mosaic, with a design oddly suggestive of a colossal frog
pinned out under a microscope.

Lieutenant Simpson, in his famous report of 1850, scouts the idea that
these reservoirs were sufficient for village use and quotes Lieutenant
Abert, who three years earlier wrote of water holes near which his men
encamped. “Between our camp and the city [Ácoma] there was some water
that ran along the bed of the stream for a few yards when it disappeared
beneath the sand. This furnished the inhabitants with drinking water.”
It is true that, the night we spent at the foot of the Crag, we were
supplied with water brought by our chauffeur and an Indian from a spring
a mile or more distant.

Not far below and a little east of the emptied reservoir was a pathetic
attempt at a garden on a fairly level shelf of the rock, to which some
soil had been brought from the far-down valley. Here were one good-sized
peach tree and two tiny ones guarded by an ungainly scarecrow. Of any
other green or growing thing there was no trace anywhere upon the
northern mesa.

A vast plain surrounds Ácoma, and the far horizon to the south is ringed
with barrier walls of forbidding strength. Natural fortresses they are,
with weird castellated bastions and watch towers. Toward the north, rises
the gracious blue Sierra de San Mateo,[13] an extinct volcano regarded
with deep reverence by all these native people. Thence came their timber
_vigas_ or whatever other wood might be needed by the pueblo, all to be
brought by human labor across thirty miles of desert.[14] On the slopes
of San Mateo, we are told, are the most holy and hidden places of prayer
and ritual, which the uninitiated may never find or penetrate. Well-worn
trails run from Laguna and Zuñi as well as from Ácoma to the summit, and
I have been told by a resident of Albuquerque of an altar and prayer
sticks found there in recent days.

Leading from the top of the Crag to the plain below there are, according
to Lummis,[15] seven trails. Of that number we identified six. We found
one on the north, one on the northeast, one on the southwest, and three
on the west. The seventh, which Lummis calls the “Split Trail,” we did
not see. We more than suspect that there are, besides, trails to the
south mesa.

Although Hodge thinks there were always several trails, all difficult and
more or less dangerous, the only one ordinarily accepted as existing
before 1629 was that on the northwest side, called the “Ladder Trail.” It
was formed by toe and finger holes cut in the solid rock and worn deeper
by the moccasined feet of the dwellers on the summit. This is the trail
that came to be known as the “Camino del Padre,” after Fray Juan Ramírez
made his famous ascent to the rock in that year. Up such a staircase as
this in the early days every ounce of adobe for their houses, and the
wooden beams for their buildings, had to be brought on their backs by the
patient dwellers seeking safety from the hostile roving tribes.

Not far to the east of the Camino del Padre, the most often used of all
the seven, is the dangerous and now abandoned north trail, where Zaldívar
made his feint in the most audacious storming known to military history.
The Indians call it either the “Runner’s Trail” or “Deadman’s Trail,”
but they say it has not been in use for many years. It seems as if the
trail described by the earliest explorers must be that at the northeast
end of the pueblo, for the much-used toe-and-finger trail is neither long
enough nor hazardous enough to correspond to their descriptions. One day
when we were standing above the northeast trail, an Indian with a sense
of humor called to us, when halfway up, asking for a rope to be let down,
and declaring for quite a while that he could never arrive unassisted.
Our host said, quite frankly, that he often went down that way, but never
came up by it, because “It’s too hard work.”

[Illustration: THE LADDER TRAIL

_Bolton_]

No trails over the sheer precipices to the east are mentioned by any
writer, and none on the south except the one far round toward the
southwest, sometimes called the “Staircase Trail.” Over the upper part
of this trail are carefully built well-cut steps of wood and stone, but
the lower part is chiefly of the toe-and-finger type. Near the top, in a
small natural cavern, we found little bundles of twigs and remnants of
feathers carefully hidden away, no doubt a shrine of prayer.

Then there is the “Burro Trail,” which we concluded is the one built
under the inspiration of Father Ramírez, so that a more comfortable
pathway from the plain might be possible for man and beast. At its
head is a good-sized wooden cross which still on Cross Day, in May,
is decorated with flowers and before which the people used to kneel
to receive a blessing from the bishop during his annual visit. Here
daily come and go the burros upon their arduous toil below. This trail
debouches not far from the wide sand ramp, which we heard called the “New
Trail,” a sort of dyke, formed in part by the wind in recent years, and
now the easiest footpath up the Crag. The “Split Trail,” which we did not
see, lies on the west, between the Staircase and the Burro Trail. It has
three forks below, and its main stem, above, is described as a very stiff
scramble. I had hoped to see the lower end of every one of these trails,
but we were told it was impossible to follow with the car around the base
of the rock, on account of the sand, and though I was promised an escort
on foot, the man refused to go, when the time came, saying he couldn’t
understand why I wished to see where the trails came out upon the plain.
Did it seem to him an idle fancy, or was he a little suspicious that we
were spying upon the pueblo for some mysterious reason, which he resented?

Near the southern rim of the plateau, quite isolated from the
house-blocks, is the great church, still in good repair. Later on during
that first afternoon we sat facing the western sky beyond its precincts,
and within sight, as we believed, of the famous cleft over which Villagrá
made his epoch-making leap in the fight of 1598. Directly in front of us
rose two colossal pillars of eroded rock forming a portal through which
our eyes were led across the plain to where, over the riven mountain
walls, sunlight and an indescribable depth of purple shadow were blending
into amethystine haze as the Sun God sank to his rest, just as one has
seen it over a boundless ocean. Who can do less at such a moment than
join in reverent worship of the Sun? Soon came the men, one by one,
from their toil up the steep finger-and-toe trail to home and supper,
followed upon the Burro Trail by a great company of those patient little
beasts driven by boys into a corral directly behind the church. All was
deserted, peaceful, so we also strolled toward our house of friendly
hospitality, climbing by its ladder over the first storey and then by
shallow steps in the adobe to the next terrace. There our hostess met
us in the open door and signified that all our belongings were to the
left, beyond a low parapet, on the terrace of a friend, now absent, and
therefore available for our use.

[Illustration: ÁCOMA “DOORWAYS”

ENTRANCE FROM THE GROUND

_Bolton_]

[Illustration: THE TWO UPPER STOREYS, ÁCOMA

_Bolton_]

To our dismay our host and our Laguna guide were just leaving “for a
meeting of great importance,” and with them all our cherished hopes of
evening talk and tales of the long ago (_hamaha_) and the far away.
Rather apologetically a man was pointed out to us, sitting by the door,
“Mr. Miller, who will talk with you.” I found him to be one who had known
several students of Zuñi folk-lore, and who confirmed various things
about which we asked, but we learned nothing new. Our disappointment
was the old experience. The self-respect of the Indians admits no
curious inquiry into their private life, and why should it? How can
they discriminate between the truly interested and friendly student of
their poetry, and the selfish and unscrupulous exploiter of their sacred
inheritance? They have so long been made the target of the unsympathetic
white man who treats them as fair game, that they have every
justification for suspicion. Trying as it was to us, who merely longed to
preserve and record their swiftly vanishing traditions, we could not find
it in our hearts to murmur. How many of us would disclose to a casual
stranger to whom we had generously accorded a night’s hospitality, the
treasures of our ancestral heritage?

When we had spoken our good-nights, the mystery of everything about us
grew more profound, enfolding all the world in the eloquent silences of
moonlit heaven above and dim floating space below. In such a scene, as we
lay upon an adobe terrace, which was of course the roof of a house below,
sleep seemed not worth the courting. That may be had in the boisterous
town. This was for once only.

    Below lay stretched the boundless universe,
    There far as the remotest line
    That limits swift imagination’s flight,
    Unending orbs mingled in mazy motion
    Immutably fulfilling
    Eternal Nature’s law.[16]

At midnight, at three in the morning, and again at six, the _Kahera_
or town-crier—an annually elected official—went the rounds of all the
streets, clad in a scarlet blanket and jingling bells like those on the
sleigh-reins of children, chanting the while a monotonous invocation.
It proved to us the truth of an observation that contrary to the usual
pueblo custom of a town-crier shouting out his news from the highest
roof-top, Ácoma has always pursued a fashion of her own, sending the
man through street after street just as we heard him. When asked in
the morning the meaning thereof, our host said it was the announcement
of important work at the watering place and a warning to all to bestir
themselves. That might be reasonable for the six-o’clock round, but it
hardly seemed so for the others in dead of night. We wondered if perhaps
it had aught to do with the invasion of the Crag by three Americans.

Almost all visitors speak of the Ácomas as unusually cleanly, and
certainly our experience bears this out. But since they lie down at night
in their clothes on their fur rugs or thin _colchones_, one wonders when
they get the refreshment of baths or of changed attire. Morning toilets
are consequently brief, and we, like our Indian friends, were early
astir. Except where the household has adopted American ways, meals are
served on the floor in the ancient fashion. There the family will seat
itself in a circle around the bowls of chili and coffee and bread. We
were therefore interested to observe that this household had assembled
about an ordinary rectangular deal table. Here also had come for his
breakfast the governor of the pueblo, because he belonged, like our
hostess, to the Eagle Clan and had the right to be considered temporarily
a member of her family. His own people were already gone to the
farm-lands at Acomita and we were told that many others would join the
colony there upon the arrival of the children next day from the schools
at Albuquerque or Santa Fé.

The whole policy of the community is rapidly changing, for instead of
the age-long custom of the men going to Acomita only for the seasons of
planting and of harvest, more and more the bulk of the people live there
the year round. Why, say the younger generation, should we climb those
weary heights when there are no Apaches to fear? Hence many of them
return to the pueblo on the Crag only for ceremonies at stated intervals.
This makes the atmosphere more sacrosanct than ever, and consequently
more difficult for white students to study and record the life story of
the Peñol. Although James, rightly enough, calls the people who now live
in the lofty eyrie “pleasant faced, soft voiced, gentle and hospitable,”
the visitor is never likely to be unaware of an impenetrable aloofness of
mind and manner, which holds him far from intimacy. Our hostess soon made
evident that she was eager for us to leave early and she more than sped
the parting guest, with inviolable dignity but also with very evident
relief.

We had, however, an appointment to keep with the governor, who had
himself agreed to show us the interior of the great church which brave
Fray Juan Ramírez had toiled to create in the early seventeenth century.
Surely there are few memorials of the Spanish epoch in the Southwest that
present such a picture of dauntless faith in spiritual ideals as does
this fortress church silhouetted high against the sky above the bleak
mesa.

An impression prevails that the present edifice is not in any part the
original one of Ramírez, but one built after the reconquest in 1699 or
1700.[17] In the letters of Vargas he tells of paying a visit to the
church of St. Stephen in 1693, after he had received the submission of
its inhabitants. In his own words, “the walls are a yard and a half
thick and able to withstand the heavy rains that break windows and
skylights.”

[Illustration: GENERAL VIEW OF ÁCOMA PUEBLO

CLOISTER IN FOREGROUND

_Bolton_]

The interval of six years between this letter and the date (1699)
usually given as that of the present church was so patently only the
final struggle of the spent force of enmity that it hardly seems
probable the Ácomas would take the trouble to demolish their neglected
church, especially to the extent of changing its site “a few feet to the
south.”[18] We may, therefore, assume that by 1699 the shrine needed
extensive repairs, but that in substance we can visit to-day the basilica
of Ramírez. It measures 150 feet in length and has walls that are 60
feet high and 10 feet thick. Timbers 40 feet long and 14 inches through
support the roof and make a handsome ceiling, for between them, laid in
herringbone design, are the stalks of the yucca, colored blue, yellow or
red, making a close rush mat visible between the beams. The entrance is
by a wooden door at the east, and a gallery just inside is reached by
a plain flight of steps close to the north wall. There are of course
no seats, and the only decoration of the nave is a crude red _dado_ of
paint reaching perhaps three feet from the floor. This and the bare white
wall above are freshly done each year before the great fiesta of St.
Stephen on September second. At the western end the chancel is raised
by three shallow steps. Behind the altar is a gaudily painted Mexican
screen done in 1802. To the left hangs the miracle-working painting of
San José sent to the Mission by Charles II of Spain, it is said. On the
opposite wall is another holy picture painted on buffalo hide by some
Mexican craftsmen. The San José painting was for years a serious cause
of dissension and almost of war between Ácoma and Laguna, so that it was
amusing to have my host pull me by the sleeve and say, _sotto voce_,
pointing to our chauffeur, “Don’t speak of it, he’s Laguna.” To one who
has seen the very beautiful decoration of walls and chancel in the Laguna
church, it seems unlikely that any envy of Ácoma now exists in that
village.

In the autumn of 1924, the Committee for the Reconstruction and
Preservation of New Mexico Mission Churches received a gift from a
generous citizen of Denver, Colorado, that enabled them to repair the
roof of Ácoma church. Their report repeats graphically the ancient story
of the toilful work involved. Once again might be seen the laboring
procession of heavy-laden Indians and patient burros carrying all the
material needed up the steep trail three hundred and fifty-seven feet
to the top of the mesa. Once there, it must yet be hoisted sixty feet
higher to the roof of the shrine itself. So low was the water in the
reservoirs that that also had to be brought from springs in the plain
below. The statistics are: 50,000 pounds of water, 24,000 pounds of
cement, 72,000 pounds of sand, 5,000 pounds of felt-roofing, 5,000 pounds
of asphalt, and 35,000 feet of boards for scaffolding.[19]

Perhaps no other modern task in the pueblo country has so impressed upon
the minds of present-day workers the enormous labor or the devotion to a
humanistic ideal such as Fray Juan Ramírez inaugurated at Ácoma more than
three hundred years ago.

There were cloisters and conventual rooms adjacent to this church which
tell of its having been the centre of religious work, and altogether it
is one of the most remarkable of the ancient missions; but of it we have
few genuine records. That, at one time, the patron saint was changed
to San Pedro, the bell in the northeast tower bears witness by its
inscription, “San Pedro, 1710.” Subsequently St. Stephen resumed his sway.

To-day the cloister is only a bare promenade of three sides enclosed
by walls on the ground level into which a few unglazed windows admit
scant light. Upon the dirt floor more or less littered with outcast
odds and ends you are shown the hugest of beams, lying prone, which it
is claimed came from the early church, and the marvel is how anything
so gigantic and unwieldy was ever got up the steep crag, even after
it had been brought across the desert from San Mateo. Someone tried to
tell us that the Indians waited till rains had filled the arroyos of the
mountain slopes so that these heavy timbers could be floated at least
part way down the long journey; but my Albuquerque informant, who owns
great cattle ranches in the vicinity of San Mateo, assured me that this
was impossible, since there are never streams sufficient for any such
purpose. He felt sure of the veracity of the Indians, who say that after
a _viga_ for a church has been cut and smoothed, it would be sacrilege to
let it touch the ground; it must somehow be carried all the way by men.
He knew that the _vigas_ for the houses were borne upon the shoulders of
men. A pleasanter walk than that within the cloister may be taken upon
its flat and unsheltered roof. From there one looks down into the tiny
and now very pathetic garden patio in which one moribund peach tree alone
stands upright. From there too, he may lift his eyes in rapt admiration
to the splendid panorama of the great plain and the encircling mountains.

Above the cloister and built upon its corner, there is a charming
loggia with a hand-carved wooden railing of simple but attractive
design. Here again the view is inspiring, and one likes to fancy those
self-sacrificing priests refreshing themselves at the quiet end of day
by resting there and taking into their wearied spirits the peace of so
healing an aspect of nature.

[Illustration: THE CHURCH, ÁCOMA

_Bolton_]

It remains to speak of the great graveyard directly in front of the
church, “where the dead of centuries sleep unmindful.” It is an enclosure
nearly two hundred feet square, surrounded by a stone wall, plastered
with adobe. This has been recently disfigured by ill-moulded knob-like
heads perhaps a foot high, that stand at regular intervals on its top.
We were told they were done during the Great War, and are called the
“soldier guard.” Burial must take place within twenty-four hours after
death and there is at Ácoma no separation of the sexes in that resting
place under the protection of the church. Either the father’s clan or
the mother’s clan takes part in the ceremony and the company is made up
entirely of men, save that the water jar, which is to be broken over the
grave, may be borne by a woman. When the dead body has been tenderly
wrapped in its handsomest blanket, it is lowered with the head toward the
east, and above the covering earth is broken the symbolic jar of water.

Early one afternoon, we saw a sad little procession coming up the
long sand ramp bringing the body of a woman of the pueblo wrapped
in a glorious scarlet blanket[20] for burial. The six bearers were
carefully dressed; two followed with bulky burdens on their shoulders
and one more behind had pick and spade. As they slowly went through
the widest street on the summit, a bitter keening was taken up by all
the women, house after house, but all from within doors. This lasted
until the funeral group were within their own shelter, when the women
we were with returned to their work without any evidence of emotion.
Naturally we could not intrude upon the burial itself, of which, later
in the afternoon, a dull and distant drumming, followed by three or
four strokes of the church bell, gave warning. From a distance we saw
the censer swung while the earth was being removed, and that only the
nine men took part in the last ceremony. Lummis tells us that during
the actual interment, the shamans in the desolated house are “blinding
the eyes of the ghosts that they may not find the trail of the vanished
soul on its journey to Si-pa-pu.” The spirit of the deceased is believed
to hover about his earthly home for four days,[21] when a _Cheani_[22]
brings in the feather prayer-sticks,[23] which he has made at home, and
puts them where the deceased has lain. Then he offers a prayer and bids
him “begone.” After this the _Cheani_ carry these same feather sticks
to the gate of Si-pa-pu, a place a mile west of the town where the
rocky conformation opens to the north. Meanwhile the household drinks a
cedar brew, and vomits. This is an essential part of all purification
rituals by which within and without the entire body is made clean. There
follows a general head-washing of the kindred, or, as some have said,
of all the clans-people. Re-marriage may not occur till the end of a
full twelvemonth, and meantime the children have been cared for by the
kinsfolk of their mother, with whom the father may also remain, if he is
the one left; or he may live with his own people.

[Illustration: A KISI IN A RIO GRANDE PUEBLO]

An unmarried girl who had died in childbirth on the day of the arrival
of Dr. Parsons (from whose monograph this account is taken) was buried
without the usual water jar of oblation and hence no broken potsherds
were left upon the mound. A feast, however, was prepared, for which a
sheep was killed and its pelt offered for sale by her mother. Wafer bread
was baked, and a brew of cedar twigs was made on the stove, of which
the mother must have partaken, for she was seen going through the usual
after-vomiting. It happened to be the first day of the _hoinawe_[24]
dance, but none of this household went out to watch it. During the day
the girl’s father had brought in a load of wood, and in the evening he
took supper with the American guest and invited her to go with him to
see the cacique;[25] that being over, she was taken by the father of the
dead girl into two houses to see other dances, an evident proof that the
period of mourning was at an end. The next day, being the fifth after
the death, all the household had their hair washed and they now watched
the dances. One of the women who watched had earlier thrown bread to the
dancers. A decoction of the tansy-mustard[26] is drunk “to make them
forget the dead,” although it was once described to Dr. Parsons at Ácoma
as poisonous.

A second visit to Ácoma brought some new impressions and confirmed or
corrected others. To be where the sun is the only time-piece by day and
the Dipper by night, and where no form of trade is nearer than nineteen
miles, unless one undertakes to transport the delicate pottery of the
women, is certainly a unique experience. Through the day we watched at
intervals the marvelously deft and steady fingers of our hostess as
she outlined elaborate designs upon some large jars, no two being the
same, never hesitating for an instant whether it were the hair-line
in parallels on the lip, or the curve of a bird’s wing on the rounded
surface, of the jar. A younger woman with her yucca-fibre brush filled in
the solid spaces, such, for example, as a lozenge or the wing of a bird,
all the colors being previously ground and prepared in shallow dishes
from minerals collected by the women themselves. During the day ten such
jars were decorated.

That night we made our beds on the ground at the foot of the Crag
under “crumbling columns grand against the moon” with such protection
as we could find from the sand flying before a high wind that blew
continuously even after there was no longer any threatening of rain. Dark
and heavy clouds threw dramatic shadows on the outstanding towers that
rose all about us, taking on grotesque totemic forms, rugged, massive,
sculpturesque. If by day the houses seem part of the Crag, by night the
entire Peñol takes on even more the aspect of a fortress with outstanding
escarpments.

When at last all grew clear, I sat through the hours of darkness under a
vast and vaulted sky in a silence so enfolding that it was awesome. Only
once the whinny of a horse from a not distant corral broke the stillness;
only once some four-footed creature trotted across the middle distance,
stopped to watch me curiously, but, because I was motionless, went on its
way, thinking, perhaps, I too was no more than an outcropping figure of
those walls and bastions that seemed veritably the temple precincts of a
more heroic age and race than ours.

Then came the dawn, grey and pearly. As it warmed to rose, we bestirred
ourselves, sobered by the solemnity of surroundings and of effects that
baffle words—scarcely even to be named beauty because of overtones of a
strange and wondrous majesty.

Before saying a final farewell to the Sky City, we followed a road for
nearly two miles, a little west of north, out to a point from which
may be had the finest of all the general views of the Crag, with its
many vertical pinnacles and shadowy coves. From there the length of the
mesa-top is better comprehended, as well as the perfect adaptation of the
long, low lines of the houses to the natural situation, while the great
church with its two very solid towers is silhouetted against the sky as
a separate and individual element of the composition. Nowhere can be
better understood the keynote of pueblo culture, which is the astonishing
harmony attained by the Indians with all the elemental forces surrounding
him, especially evidenced in the building of his houses as a part of the
natural setting. Five centuries ago the Spaniard found the Indian and
his dwelling probably as they had been, it may well be, for thousands
of years. To-day, of all existing pueblos, Ácoma has surrendered itself
least to the changes which the invader endeavored to introduce and called
“improvement.”

[Illustration: THE LONG LINE OF ÁCOMA

TWO MILES AWAY

_Bolton_]

The age-long mistrust of the white men at Ácoma had apparently reached
a critical moment at the time of our second visit. The _hócheni_ (war
captain) was in full authority and the kindly host of our first visit
was helpless to make our stay rewardful. Apparently they were the only
men still on the Crag and they were not in agreement about the reception
to be given visitors. Consequently we could see nothing new, and I was
even warned not to make notes within sight of the _hócheni_. The number
and position of the _kivas_ (ceremonial chambers)[27] were details about
which we were especially keen to learn, but, alas, we were entirely
baffled. I must therefore resort to a statement of Dr. Elsie Clews
Parsons that at Ácoma there are two _estufas_ (Spanish for stoves), which
she calls, “A, east end, north side of Middle Row, and B, west end of
North Row.” It is altogether probable that Ácoma does not greatly differ
from other pueblos, either in its arrangement or its use of ceremonial
chambers. Hence I venture to describe them as given elsewhere, and apply
this knowledge inferentially to Ácoma.

The number of _kivas_ in the pueblos is very variable, and because at
Ácoma they are almost necessarily embodied in the community house-block,
instead of being isolated structures as is true of most villages, we have
no visible token of their positions. Bandelier says[28] that in his time
there were six at Ácoma, but Dr. Parsons found no one willing to tell her
either the names or number of them in her visits there in 1917 and 1918.

Though we never discovered the Ácoma _kivas_, at Walpi, where no
ceremonial was in progress, we were allowed freely to enter those of the
Antelope and of the Snake Clan. The sacred chamber was in each case a
simple, unadorned room, with a bare hearth, its entrance ladder resting
on a low platform. There were niches in the walls for ceremonial objects,
and hanging from nails or poles were some undistinguishable small
ornaments and a few masks.

A stringent requirement of the _kiva_ form is that it should be at least
partly subterranean, so it is of necessity entered only by a ladder
thrust down from the top through a hatchway. The more primitive form of
the _kiva_ is circular, but at Ácoma it is described as rectangular,
because, owing to the conditions enforced by a rocky table land, the
_kiva_ here became a part of the lowest storey of the house-block,
hollowed somewhat deeper into the rock to meet the religious requirement.
The curious orifice in the _kiva_, called Si-pa-pu, represents the place
from which human beings originally emerged, and the peculiar arrangement
of the floor within the _kiva_ suggested to Mr. Mindeleff that it perhaps
typified the four worlds of the genesis-myth, and the “four houses”
of the creation myths. The Si-pa-pu with its cavity beneath the floor
indicates the lowest house under the earth—the abode of the Creator,
Myuinga. The main or lower floor represents the second stage where Light
came; the elevated section of the floor, the third stage where animals
were created. Upon this platform animal-fetiches are set in groups at New
Year festivals. It is also to be noted that the ladder to the surface
is always of pine and always rests on the platform, never on the lower
floor. In their traditional genesis, the people climbed from the third
house by means of a tree or a ladder of pine through such an opening as
the _kiva_ hatchway to the outer air, or the fourth world.[29]

The _kiva_ has also been called the nearest approach that the Indian
had to a school-house for the boys of the tribe. There, during the long
winter evenings, the old men—tellers of tales—would sit wrapped in their
many-colored blankets and recite their legends; it might be the story
of their origin and their wanderings, or the blood-curdling relation
of how their peaceful life was broken in upon by the dreaded Comanches
or the Navajos; and then, again, by the invading white men, who came
on strange four-footed beasts, filling the souls of the Ancients with
terror and awe. Out of such long-spun tales, from the poetry of nature
to the massacre of their “nations,” the wondering boys would gradually
learn the tribal lore of their people and the mystery of their religious
traditions, which could be transmitted only word by word from the elders
to the growing generation. Morgan tells us that, at Taos, the special
duty of this all-important instruction was given to three old men.
Regarding Ácoma, we have no definite information.

At Isleta, in conversation with an educated and very reliable Indian,
now federal judge of the pueblo, I was told it is still a regular thing
through the winter evenings to assemble the boys, to whom the older men
“tell the stories of our origin and our beliefs. We begin about nine
o’clock every night and talk till three in the morning, and it takes two
weeks of such talks to complete the story.” This suggests that in Isleta,
at any rate, there still exists the ancient custom of the boys sleeping
in the _estufa_, going home only for their meals, just as Spartan boys
were taken from the homes of their parents to receive the arduous Spartan
training.

Not only were the _estufas_ or _kivas_ used for clan and pueblo councils
and for the education of the boys, but nearly all the early Spanish
chroniclers write as if the men used them also as a sort of club-house
where they could keep warm on cold winter days. Coronado speaks of “very
good rooms underground and paved at Granada (or Háwikuh) which are made
for winter and are something like hot baths,” and again “places where the
men gather for consultation. The young men live in the _estufas_, which
are underground, square or round.” Father Escobar writes, “There are many
good _estufas_ in each pueblo, which, with little fire, are very warm
and wherein they pass the snow and cold of winter.”[30] In some tribes
there was certainly a discrimination made between _kivas_, or purely
ceremonial chambers, and _estufas_ for more commonplace purposes, where
even the sweat baths[31] were sometimes given. It is said that Keresan
tribes always have two _kivas_. We have no reason to think that more than
a single form existed at Ácoma.

The _kiva_ was reserved for the business of the clan, which included
the training for the rituals, to be announced to the pueblo in due
season by the town crier. Here also are celebrated the secret rites of
the fraternities and priesthoods, in many of which there are grades of
promotion through which only may an individual slowly attain the goal of
his ambition and become a power in his tribe.

In times of council meeting, not even the Indian women may approach the
_kivas_ save to place food within reach of the entrance.[32] If need
arises to summon forth a member, prearranged signals are used. The fire
on the hearth may sometimes point out the position of a hidden _kiva_ to
a wise-eyed stranger, such as the one who wrote that at Ácoma “far into
the night the watcher is aware of a spiral of smoke curling above the
dark hatchway from the sacred fire that never dies nor ever shall.”[33]
It is desirable to correct a popular misconception that the _kiva_ was
ever in any sense a temple. The only temple the Indian knew, or would
think worthy, was the great outdoors. Forest aisles or mountain shrines
alone served for the place of communion with Divinity.[34]

For appointed ceremonials small conical structures called _kisi_ are
built in the open plaza for the necessary offices of the ritual. These
are made of cotton-wood boughs covered with leaves and supported by
poles, each about fifteen feet long, driven into the ground and strapped
together at the apex. The orifice for the Si-pa-pu is on the ground in
front of an opening facing the south.

Since prayer-smoke is the most nearly universal symbol of the Indian’s
yearning toward the Unseen, I venture to quote here a song used in the
ceremony of the Hako, by a tribe so remote from Ácoma as the Pawnee:[35]

        See the smoke ascend!
    Now the odor mounts, follows where his voice
        Sped, intent to reach
    Where the gods abide. There the odor pleads,
        Pleads to gain us help.

Such are the most striking features of an Indian pueblo. At Ácoma
certainly they have been but little altered since the sixteenth century.
The political organization of the pueblos seems to have changed more,
for, in respect to nomenclature, at any rate, it is an interesting
mixture of Indian and Spanish.




Chapter III

FIRST EXPEDITIONS FROM NEW SPAIN

    In the beginning of the sixteenth century, Spain occupied
    perhaps the most prominent position on the theatre of
    Europe.... The Spaniard came over to the New World in the true
    spirit of a knight errant, courting adventure however perilous,
    wooing danger, as it would seem, for its own sake. With sword
    and lance, he was ever ready to do battle for the Faith, and
    as he raised his old war-cry of “Santiago,” he fancied himself
    fighting under the banner of the military apostle. It was
    the expiring age of chivalry and Spain, romantic Spain, was
    the land where its light lingered longest above the horizon.
    Arms ... was the only career which the high-mettled cavalier
    could tread with honor. The New World, with its strange and
    mysterious perils, afforded a noble theatre for the exercise
    of his calling, and the Spaniard entered on it with all the
    enthusiasm of a paladin.—W. H. PRESCOTT, _The Conquest of
    Mexico_.


The tradition is no longer credited that Cabeza de Vaca in his marvellous
journey of eight years from the Florida coast across perilous lands to
New Spain actually saw any part of what is now New Mexico. Nevertheless,
it was the tales he had gathered on the way, of the Northern Mystery and
the Seven Cities, that eventually brought both these localities into
history. Vaca reached Culiacán (Mexico) in the late spring of 1536. Men
stared to hear of Narváez’ ill-fated attempt to “explore, conquer and
colonize the country between Florida and the Rio Grande.” They were
staggered at the story of all that had befallen in the intervening years,
by way of hardship, imprisonment, and slavery, the four survivors of the
gallant three hundred who had entered the continent eight years earlier.
When Vaca arrived in the capital he related his story to the viceroy,
Antonio de Mendoza. Here was great news for the silk-stockinged official.
Eager to gain for himself and his king the glory of new discoveries of
territory and of unlimited riches that were said to be buried in the
northern regions, he made immediate preparations for exploration.[36]

First a preliminary reconnaissance was undertaken. To lead it the viceroy
chose Marcos de Niza, a Franciscan friar, who had served a difficult
apprenticeship in Peru under Pizarro. Mendoza directed him to go north
with one lay-brother, Onorato, and a small number of Indians. Coronado,
Governor of New Galicia, accompanied them as far as Culiacán. The
instructions with which Mendoza outfitted them were “a model of careful
and explicit directions.” Estévan, a negro servant who had come with
Vaca, was interpreter, and varying bodies of native Indians made up the
party. They left Culiacán on March 7, 1539. At Petatlán, Fray Onorato
became ill and was left behind, after which Fray Marcos was the only
white man in the expedition. In the Sonora valley they halted while
Estévan was sent ahead to reconnoiter.

Estévan was to send back Indian messengers with crosses, whose size
would indicate the value of the country found. After four days, a runner
appeared bearing “a cross as tall as a man.” This assured Fray Marcos
that Estévan had news of cities equal to those from which they had
started in New Spain. The runner confirmed the impression by telling of a
province ahead with large cities built up with houses of stone and lime,
and all under one lord.

[Illustration: NEW MEXICO IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY.

FROM BANCROFT. ARIZONA AND NEW MEXICO]

Eager now, Fray Marcos started ahead. Soon he met with Indians wearing
fine turquoises in their ears and noses, or on their waist belts. These
folk, eager to see the strangers pass on, told of houses farther north
that had their doorways studded with gold and turquoises. To the infinite
embarrassment of the friar, gifts of this stone and of skins, such as
served the natives for raiment, were pressed upon him. Other Indians that
were met wandering inland from the seacoast, talked of pearls that could
be gathered in quantity.

Estévan had been told to wait for Fray Marcos. Instead he pressed on
down the San Pedro valley. In Cíbola he excited the anger of the native
population, probably by posing as a great medicine man and using, very
likely, the gourds or rattles of a hostile tribe. According to the Zuñi
legend, he was taken beyond the pueblo precincts and there given “a
powerful kick which sped him through the air back to the south whence he
came.”[37]

When the friar arrived late in May (1539) within sight of the first of
the Seven Cities of Cíbola he found the inhabitants in no mood to receive
another alien visitor, and, like Moses, forbidden to enter the promised
land, he could but look into it from a near-by eminence on the south.
Alone, and unarmed, he had no other choice than to turn back, thankful,
no doubt, to escape from death himself, since he was known to be the
responsible chief of Estévan. By hasty marches, “with far more fright
than food,” the friar reached New Spain once more. There he reported to
the viceroy all that he had seen. What is more valuable, he scrupulously
differentiated between this and what he had been told of treasures in the
region beyond.

The Zuñis still talk of the “Black Mexican” and point out K’iakima,
a ruin on a bluff at the southwest angle of To-yo-ál-a-na (Thunder
Mountain) as the place of his murder. Hodge, who has followed Cushing[38]
in very careful and important work at Zuñi, is satisfied that Háwikuh was
the village first seen by Estévan and that there he met his death; also
that it “was the city of Cíbola rising from the plains which Niza and
his Piman guides viewed from the southern heights in 1539; moreover that
it was the pueblo which Coronado stormed in the summer of the following
year, seems indisputable.”[39]

Háwikuh, to-day a ruin of great interest, lies fifteen miles southwest
of modern Zuñi. On our way thither we overtook and passed an Indian
pointed out as the prize man in the foot-race that is of special ritual
significance to this tribe. A hardy, compact figure, he was no longer
young, but never failed to do his daily stint of dog-trot practice which
would keep him in condition for the annual competition. Háwikuh was built
on the slopes of a round and not very elevated hill. The most noticeable
of the many excavations are those of the _kiva_ and mission church, not
far separated from each other, thus perfectly exemplifying the dual
religious allegiance that has prevailed from the first baptism of an
Indian by Spanish padres until the present day. A great plain stretches
out on every side, sparsely dotted with the familiar stunted herbage of
the desert. Standing on the summit of the mound, the middle distance is
broken toward the south by a range of moderate height and steepness. On
some one of its projecting cliffs the friar might well have stood to look
upon the coveted goal to which he might not win. Vast horizons encompass
the plain and far off the twin peaks of the Zuñi buttes pierce the sky.
It is a lonely scene but the more easy for that reason to re-people with
the figures of a vanished past.

Fray Marcos not only saw Háwikuh, but he also heard of Ácoma. The Indian
with whom Estévan had talked told the friar that, besides these Seven
Cities, there were other territories which they called Marata, Acus, and
Totonteac. Acus was described as an independent kingdom and province. Its
people went _encaconados_: that is, with turquoises hanging from their
noses and ears. The turquoise they called “Cacona.” The village called
“Ácuco” or “Tutahaco” lay between Cíbola and the streams running to the
southwest, entering the “Sea of the North.” Ácuco was Ácoma,[40] which
therefore came into history only twenty years after Cortés entered the
City of Mexico.

When Fray Marcos returned to Culiacán in the late summer of 1539, his
accounts of what he had seen, and what he had heard, were sufficient
to inflame the imagination of the Spaniards there, who were longing
for conquest, for wealth, and for fame. It did not take long to raise
a volunteer army, nor to excite the viceroy to do all in his power to
further an expedition that might be expected to bring much renown to
himself, to the King of Spain, and to Holy Church. For it is never to be
forgotten that the soldier armies of Spain were always supplemented by
smaller armies of priests.

[Illustration: HÁWIKUH TO-DAY

FIRST OF THE SEVEN CITIES OF CÍBOLA

_Bolton_]

[Illustration: THE RUINED CHURCH OF HÁWIKUH

_Bolton_]

The Royal Council of the Indies decreed that a new attempt to explore
the north should be made both by sea and by land (1540). Hernando de
Alarcón was given command of two vessels, and he was ordered to keep near
the coast so as to be able easily to coöperate with the land force. As a
matter of fact the two divisions never did meet or communicate.

Don Francisco Vásquez Coronado was chosen captain-general of the
overland expedition to the north. He was accompanied by a gallant troop
of four hundred Spaniards and eight hundred Indians. It must have been
a brilliant spectacle when this cavalcade, with its gaily caparisoned
horses, its mule train, and its herds of cattle and sheep for food
supply, finally set forth from Compostela on Shrove Tuesday, February 23,
1540. The chief of the religious was Fray Juan de Padilla, once a soldier
but now a Franciscan, destined to become the proto-martyr of the North.
Among others who bore distinguished names three are of especial interest
to us, since they have left tangible evidence of their exploits. The
standard-bearer of the army, Don Pedro de Tobar, discovered the Tusayán
settlements (Hopi) and heard “of a giant People and a mighty river.” Don
García López de Cárdenas first saw the great gorge known to-day as the
“Grand Cañon” of the Colorado. Hernando de Alvarado, first of white men,
saw Ácoma and talked with its inhabitants.

While encamped at Zuñi the white strangers were naturally objects of the
utmost curiosity to the native peoples. Among others who came to observe
them were some from Cicuyé (Pecos) seventy leagues eastward. They were
led by their cacique. He was handsome and well formed, and because of his
great mustaches the Spaniards called him “Bigotes.” On the body of one of
his Indians was painted a picture of a humpbacked cow (the buffalo).[41]
Coronado was told that great herds of these animals roamed the plains.
To test the story Coronado sent Alvarado and twenty other Spaniards with
the Indians charged to report again at Zuñi in eighty days. For five days
they marched eastward. They then “arrived at a town called Ácuco, a very
strange place built upon a solid rock, the inhabitants of which were
great brigands and much dreaded by all the province.”

It was Ácoma, now first seen by white men. The Crag was described as very
high, and on three sides the ascent was perpendicular. The only way to
reach the top was by a trail cut in the solid rock. The first flight was
of two hundred steps, “which could be ascended without much difficulty,
when a second flight of one hundred more commenced. These steps were
narrower and more difficult than the first, and when surmounted, there
remained twelve feet to the top which could only be ascended by putting
hands and feet in the holes cut in the rocks.” It was evidently the
difficult trail near the eastern limit of the village. On the top
great piles of stones were kept, to hurl upon an approaching enemy. No
better proof is needed of the importance to the sedentary Indians of
self-defense against the roving tribes than such a fortress pueblo,
difficult to reach and easily defended.

In warlike mood the Indians came down to the plain to meet the Spaniards.
Drawing a line in the sand, just as those at Tusayán had done, they
forbade the strangers to cross it. Persuasion was first tried. This
failing, Alvarado decided to attack. Seeing such preparations, the
Indians showed willingness to make peace by “approaching the horses to
take their perspiration and rub the whole body with it, and then to
make a cross with the fingers.”[42] They also crossed their hands, an
act considered inviolable. Castañeda mentions a cross at Ácuco, “near a
fountain, two palms high and a finger in thickness. The wood was squared
and around it were dried flowers, and little staves ornamented with
feathers.” Alvarado reported to Coronado that, on his way eastward to
the villages of Tiguex, he passed Ácuco. “It is one of the strongest
places we have seen, because the city is on a very high rock with a rough
ascent, so that we repented having gone up the place.”

There is a curious conflict between the description by Castañeda of
this first encounter with the Ácomas and that of another contemporary
writer who apparently formed a different impression of the dwellers on
the Peñol. In the anonymous “_Relación del Suceso_”[43] we read, that
Alvarado “found a rock with a village on top, the strongest position that
ever was seen in the world, which was called Ácuco in their language.
They came out to meet us peacefully though it would have been easy to
decline to do this and to have stayed on their rock, where we would not
have been able to trouble them. They gave us cloaks of cotton, skins of
deer and of cows, and turquoises, and fowls and other food which is the
same as in Cíbola.”

[Illustration: THE STAIRCASE TRAIL AND THE CHURCH

_Bolton_]

Such is the story of the first sight by Europeans of the Sky City of
the desert. In December, when the ground was covered with three feet
of snow, Coronado’s main army marched from Cíbola to Tiguex, and so
passed Ácuco, as Alvarado had done. The inhabitants furnished them with
provisions in friendly fashion. The Spaniards gazed at the settlement on
its summit with much interest, but could not ascend (or they said they
could not—it is not stated that they tried) without helping one another,
while the Indians went up and down easily, and even their women would do
so carrying heavy burdens. From this we infer that the Spaniards ascended
the Peñol, for after describing as before the “toe-and-finger trail,”
the chronicler continues, “there was a wall of large and small stones at
the top, which they could roll down without showing themselves, so that
no army could possibly be strong enough to capture the village. On the
top they had room to sow and store a large amount of corn and cisterns
to collect snow and water. They made a present of a large number of
(turkey) cocks with very big wattles, much bread, tanned deerskins, piñon
nuts, flour and corn.”[44] There was undoubtedly room enough to “store”
provisions, but then as now there was never a particle of garden soil in
which to “sow” even a little corn unless carried from the valley.

Epoch-making were the results that came from the Coronado expedition, in
the discovery of Cíbola,[45] of the Grand Cañon, and of the buffalo on
the Plains. The discovery of the Colorado River was recognized as of the
first importance. This is shown by a map made by one of Alarcón’s pilots,
for the Ulpius globe of 1542 and the map of Sebastian Cabot of 1544 were
changed by reason of this discovery. Yet Coronado took back to Spain no
material wealth, and no promise of any except such as might be gained
from the cultivation of a good soil by permanent settlers, and by some
means, at that time undiscoverable, of transportation for its products.
Hence Coronado was regarded not only as an unsuccessful explorer, but
almost as a disgraced man, who had wasted the wealth of the realm.

So great was the disappointment over this result and so absorbed were
the men of New Spain by the new mineral discoveries in Nueva Vizcaya,
as well as by the confusion produced by the Mixton War, that forty
years passed before there was another successful attempt to penetrate
the northern country. Such sporadic raids as took place in this interval
were either personal adventures of individual Spaniards or slave-hunting
forays to fill the shortage of laborers at the mines. These adventurers
had little interest in true exploration of the country they crossed
while the slave-catching aroused fear in the native mind and made
further _entradas_ more difficult. A new generation of Spanish explorers
and settlers had arisen, to whom Cíbola and Ácuco and Quivira were
practically myths, before any fresh interest was aroused to explore the
wilderness beyond.

Four decades after Coronado’s exploration, a party of adventurous spirits
made a fresh attempt to penetrate the northern wilderness. They were
only twenty-eight in number, counting soldiers, three friars and Indian
servants. They were organized by a lay brother of St. Francis, Fray
Augustin Rodríguez. Francisco Sanchez Chamuscado commanded the soldiers.
On the whole, they met little opposition from the native peoples and on
their side appear also to have dealt considerately with them.

Curiosity concerning these strange white invaders was mingled with fear
born of the earlier forays made to capture slaves who were taken back to
the mines. So soon as Fray Rodríguez made evident that he asked no more
than fish and maize in exchange for such merchandise as had been brought
along for this purpose, the people showed a child-like interest and
pointed out the way to the north. In the Tigua country, more hostility
was encountered. One of the priests, Fray Santa María, determined,
against the protests of soldiers and padres, to return to beg additional
help from the viceroy. “Children of the Sun,” the Spaniards had called
themselves to these worshippers of the great Sun-Deity, and Santa María
seems to have relied on the belief they had engendered hitherto in their
invulnerability to attack. His departure excited the suspicion of the
natives and, as he was entirely alone, he was easily killed within two
days “while sleeping, by having a large stone placed upon him and left to
die of suffocation.” Thus did the savages learn that Spaniards could be
put to death like other men, and this knowledge proved a serious obstacle
to the future progress of the invaders.

Constantly forced after this to be on their guard against plots and
ambush, the explorers settled themselves for a time at Puaray (a little
above the present city of Albuquerque), from which place excursions were
made in various directions. On one of these, going westward, hoping
to find Zuñi, they reached “a well-fortified pueblo named Ácoma, the
best there is in Christendom.” It is described by their diarist as
having five hundred houses of three and four storeys. This, then, is
the next definite mention of the Peñol. Here they were told that with
two days’ further march inland they would reach many pueblos and mines;
consequently they did not linger at Ácoma or make any close examination
of its people or their civilization.

With the remainder of this expedition[46] we have no further connection
beyond the fact that, when they had returned to San Bartolomé and
reported that they had reluctantly left behind their two friars, the
order of St. Francis at once bestirred itself to attempt their rescue.
On the tenth of December, 1582, the endeavor was inaugurated under
the leadership of Antonio de Espéjo, who offered to finance the whole
undertaking. One of the soldiers in Espéjo’s company, Miguel Sanchez
Valenciano, took with him his wife, Doña Casilda de Amaya, and their two
young children, an astonishing example of courage on her part. She was
in consequence the first white woman to enter New Mexico, the heart of
the continent, a third of a century before the Puritans brought their
families to Massachusetts.

Espéjo knew full well about the death of Fray Santa María, for Bustamente
and Gallegos, the two chroniclers, had already gone to Mexico City to
report the whole story of their experiences.[47] There were rumors, too,
that the other friars had been massacred since the soldiers left. But
the uncertainty must be removed. It was, however, a full year later that
Espéjo confirmed the truth of the massacres, when he reached Puaray. The
avowed purpose of the _entrada_ was now accomplished. Espéjo, however,
was not without other ambitions, and finding that his religious adviser,
Padre Beltrán, was in sympathy with him, he decided to make further
advances into adjacent lands. One of the routes took them as far as Jémez
and thence to Ácoma.

Espéjo’s narrative describes the fortress of Ácoma as follows:

    We set out from this province, Emexes [now known as Jémez],
    toward the west, and after going three days, or about fifteen
    leagues, we found a pueblo called Ácoma, which it appeared to
    us must be more than fifty _estados_ in height. In the very
    rock, stairs are built by which they ascend and descend from
    the town, which is very strong. They have cisterns of water
    at the top and many provisions stored within the pueblo. Here
    they gave us many mantas, deerskins and strips of buffalo-hide,
    tanned as they tan them in Flanders, and many provisions,
    consisting of maize and turkeys. These people have their
    fields two leagues from the pueblo on a river of medium size
    whose waters they intercept for irrigating purposes, as they
    water their fields with many partitions of the water near this
    river, in a marsh. Near the fields we found many bushes of
    Castilian roses. We also found Castilian onions, which grow in
    this country by themselves, without planting or cultivation.
    The mountains thereabouts apparently give promise of mines
    and other riches, but we did not go to see them as the
    people from there were many and warlike. The mountain people
    come to aid those of the settlements, who call the mountain
    people Querechos.[48] They carry on trade with those of the
    settlements, taking to them salt, game, such as deer, rabbits,
    and hares, tanned deerskins, and other things with which the
    government pays them.

    In other respects they are like those of the other provinces.
    In our honor they performed a very ceremonious _mitote_ and
    dance, the people coming out in fine array. They performed many
    juggling feats, some of them very clever with live snakes.[49]
    Both of these things were well worth seeing. They gave us
    liberally of food and of all else of which they had. And thus,
    after three days, we left this province.[50]

Four days’ march from Ácoma to the westward brought the party as far as
Cíbola (Zuñi), where they halted at the village of Hálona, the present
pueblo of the tribe.[51]

The great achievement by Espéjo was the new approach, making the third
pathway from Mexico to the north, and to this re-discovered province
which he called Nueva Andalucía. Soon afterward it was permanently
christened Nuevo Mexico.

The golden dream of the earlier explorers had been of a land bursting
with riches and glorious in opportunities for lasting renown, in short,
another “Peru” or another “Mexico.” Assuredly it had led them through
dangers and hardships which to modern ears sound as much like fairy
tales as the treasures these gallant men hoped to secure. If the reality
was far from the dream, it was, nevertheless, a land of promise. There
continued also a belief in the Strait of Anian, the long-hoped-for
northwest passage between the Atlantic and the Pacific, and some of the
claimants for the right to govern the northern territory, while speaking
scornfully to the viceroy of the sterile deserts of Cíbola and Quivira,
affirmed that the true wealth was beyond, and that by reaching that
“beyond” there would also be discovered the shorter route between the two
great seas.

[Illustration: TO-YA-LA-NE

FROM MODERN ZUÑI

_Bolton_]

[Illustration: MODERN ZUÑI, ON SITE OF ANCIENT HÁLONA

RIVER IN FOREGROUND

_Bolton_]

Enough had been discovered by Espéjo and his men to stir the imagination
and the cupidity of all New Spain. Quite naturally Espéjo felt himself
entitled to the first chance. But there were many other aspirants, and
Espéjo’s recommendation that the new province should be subject directly
to the King of Spain and not to the viceroy of New Spain, was probably
no help to the fulfillment of his ambition. In 1595 it was decided to
make a fresh attempt to conquer and colonize on a much more complex and
thoroughgoing scale than any of the others, and, beyond New Mexico,
to reach the much-talked-of Quivira. The command was entrusted to the
greatest of all those who went into the north, Juan de Oñate, who became
the true founder of New Mexico. Bolton in commenting upon it says, “This
was then the great epoch-making step toward both the Strait of Anian and
the Sea; no less than the pushing forward of a frontier whose interstices
it would take a hundred years to fill, even with military outposts.”




Chapter IV

THE BATTLE IN THE SKY CITY

    _Hand to hand and foot to foot_
    _Nothing there save death, was mute._
    _Strike, and thrust, and flash, and cry_
    _For quarter or for victory_
    _Mingle there with the volleying thunder._

                   —BYRON, _Siege of Corinth_.


There are few figures in the early history of this country so gallant
or so picturesque as that of Juan de Oñate, son of Cristóbal Oñate,
the man who discovered the rich mines of Nueva Galicia, thereby laying
the foundation of one of the first fortunes of North America. The son,
Juan, added lustre to the name by his marriage with the houses both of
Montezuma and of Cortés, so it is scarcely to be wondered at that the
viceroy Velasco chose him from the crowd of hungry applicants to be the
leader of a fresh expedition to the new province.

Oñate was accompanied by three others whose names and fortunes are
fitted to thrill those to whom the real human hero is a figure more
full of true romance than the characters of fiction. These were the two
nephews of Oñate, Juan de Zaldívar, _maestro de Campo_; Vicente Zaldívar,
_sarjento-mayor_; and Captain Gaspar de Villagrá, _procurador-general_.

Villagrá proved himself not only valiant in arms but a poet of no mean
rank. Eleven years after the event, Villagrá published in Seville a
rhymed account of the whole of the first Oñate expedition. When Bancroft
consulted it in 1877, as a mere literary curiosity, he found instead “A
complete narrative of remarkable historic accuracy ...” and he adds, “Of
all the territories of America, New Mexico alone may point to a poem as
the original authority for its early annals.”

[Illustration: FACSIMILE OF TITLE-PAGE OF VILLAGRÁ’S RHYMED HISTORY OF
NEW MEXICO]

Don Gaspar begins his epic in true Virgilian manner:

    Of arms I sing and of the man heroic:
    The being, valor, prudence, and high effort
    Of him whose endless, never-tiring patience
    Over an ocean of annoyance stretching
    Despite the fangs of foul, envenomed envy
    Brave deeds of prowess ever is achieving:
    Of those brave men of Spain, conquistadores
    Who, in the Western India nobly striving
    And searching out all of the world yet hidden
    Still onward press their glorious achievements
    By their strong arms and deeds of daring valor
    In strife of arms and hardships as enduring
    As, with rude pen, worthy of being honored.[52]

Bancroft regrets that the petition and contract granted to Oñate by the
viceroy Velasco were unattainable.[53] Since his writing they have been
discovered.[54] His contract to colonize New Mexico was made in 1595.
Oñate agreed to supply at his own cost not only two hundred men, but all
their equipment, and the live-stock, merchandise, and provisions for the
support of the colony for a year. They started forth with eighty-three
wagons, seven thousand head of stock, and one hundred and thirty
persons. In return for this, besides emoluments of land and titles,
free from crown taxation, Oñate was to be governor, _adelantado_, and
captain-general of the province. He asked the government also for the
support of six friars with proper church furnishings, and likewise full
instructions concerning the conversion of the Indians, and the tributes
he had the right to exact from them.

A change of viceroys brought about most annoying delays—even a leisurely
investigation into Oñate’s fitness for the task. There seem to have been
no limits to the official obstacles put in his path, including false
calumnies whose refutation was not easily established. But, according to
Villagrá,[55] the general never for one moment dreamed of relinquishing
his enterprise.

Finally, on January 26, 1598, nearly three years after the first award of
the contract, Oñate actually started north from Santa Barbara. In four
days he reached the Conchos River. Here the unwelcome _visitador_[56]
was finally got rid of, and Fray Alonso Martínez with ten Franciscans
was assigned as the religious aid of the pioneers. Oñate’s own equipment
almost staggers the imagination in its elaborate and complete detail.

“The lucky-starred Vicente” Zaldívar opened up a new and shorter highway
from Mexico to the Rio Grande, straight to “El Paso,”[57] and here on the
last day of April, 1598, Oñate took formal possession of New Mexico and
“all the adjoining provinces” for God, the King of Spain, and himself,
with even more than the usual grandiloquent ceremonial deemed essential
for such an event. In addition to the customary religious service, a
comic drama written by Captain Farfán was enacted. The theme chosen
depicted a conflict between Christians and Moors, in which, through the
aid of Santiago, the Christians were victorious. El Paso is therefore the
original home of European drama in the Southwest.

One of the duties given Oñate was to capture any wanderers he might find
of the unauthorized exploring ventures that had left New Spain during
the preceding years, and by good fortune he did secure two men, left by
Castaño, who understood three languages—Aztec, Spanish, and one of the
New Mexican tongues. Later, a more valuable aid was the Indian Jusephe,
who had been with Humaña and whom Oñate found with the Picuris tribe.
With these men as interpreters he could proceed more successfully. The
next thing was to force the submission and obedience of the natives.

Beyond El Paso short excursions were made, to explore or to secure
maize for food. Crossing the river, Oñate went ahead of the lumbering
caravan to “pacify the land”—taking sixty of his men with him. By the
twenty-fifth of June the company reached Puaray, where the friars were
given lodgings in a newly painted room. Imagine their astonishment next
morning when they faced upon the walls sketches which fresh paint had
failed to obliterate and which they recognized as portraits of Friars
López and Rodríguez, martyred seventeen years before.

In a _kiva_ ceremony at Santo Domingo, the chiefs of thirty-five
tribes knelt to kiss the hands of Oñate and of Padre Martínez. Thus an
“erstwhile free and sovereign people” became subjects of Philip III of
Spain and converts to Holy Roman Church.

They reached the pueblo of Caypa on July 11th, and here Oñate made his
headquarters until the spring of 1599, but changed the name to San Juan
de los Caballeros, to celebrate the knightly company who had successfully
achieved their task. In the words of Villagrá,

    ... at the end of all our toils,
    And labors with alternate weal and woe,
    We were at length approaching full of joy
    A graceful pueblo beautifully laid
    Out, and to which the name was given of
    “San Juan,” by many “de los Caballe-
    Ros,” to recall the mem’ry of those who
    First hoisted high, in these new lands
    And regions vast, the bloody Ensign on
    Which Christ was, for the weal of all Mankind, upraised.[58]

At San Juan, in the province of New Mexico, there was founded therefore
the second permanent colony in what is now the United States, nine years
before Jamestown and more than twenty years before Plymouth.

Not all was made serene and easy for the conquerors, and because the
ground was not paved with silver, many of the frontiersmen became
turbulent; others deserted, making their escape on stolen horses. To
capture such, Captain Marquéz and Villagrá were sent in hot pursuit.
While they were absent, Oñate, accompanied by Father Martínez and a
suitable escort, went forth to visit the more western pueblos in order to
receive their formal submission. As his representative at San Juan, Don
Juan Zaldívar was appointed commandant of the troops and governor of the
colony, but with orders to hand over this control to his brother Vicente
so soon as the latter should return from the buffalo plains.

Meanwhile Oñate himself visited, among other places, the Peñol of Ácoma,
where he was received with much apparent cordiality, and was given
“maize, water and turkeys.” According to the usual custom, surrender
and fealty to the rule of the lieutenants of the Spanish monarch was
demanded of the natives. Although up to this time few hints are given
of any hostility from the Indians, Oñate was far too wary to risk
surprise, and forbade his men to separate from each other while on the
mesa. The cacique, Zutucapán, whom we may picture to ourselves a man of
intelligence, crafty enough to mask his intent behind keen, penetrating
eyes, came forward to offer the white lord the supreme honor within his
gift: Would the señor descend to their holy of holies, the subterranean
_Kiva_ in the rock? There he would receive signal proofs of the desire of
the Ácomas to become worthy subjects of this all-great sovereign. Oñate,
closely surrounded by his men, very probably looked down the hatchway
from which tall, mast-like poles of the entrance ladder protruded. Was
it the silent darkness of the great hole, or did some prophetic warning
of danger hold him back? At all events, with courteous disclaimers he
refused the honor and went his way, all unaware, it would appear, how
narrowly he had escaped death from savages waiting at the ladder’s foot
to give him short shrift.

Villagrá, upon reaching San Juan, found Oñate gone to Zuñi, there to
await Zaldívar and the thirty soldiers with whom he hoped to realize his
dream of reaching the western sea. Consequently he hastened on unattended
to report to the general his success in bringing back the deserters
from the army. Like his chief, Villagrá was met at Ácoma with friendly
entreaty by Zutucapán, who, however, was something too persistent in
his questioning, so that the Spanish captain took alarm and apparently
did not leave his mount. Assuring the cacique that he was merely the
_avant-courier_ of a very large Spanish force hastening to join the
general, he managed, though pursued, to escape.

Toward nightfall, man and beast faltered with exhaustion. Throwing
himself on the bare ground, Villagrá slept, but awakened while it still
was dark to find himself covered by a blanket of snow. The day must not
betray him. Mounting his tired horse, he started forward. Only a short
distance farther on both fell into a deep pit prepared by the Ácomas
for unwary strangers, well screened by brush and now also hidden by the
falling snow. Half stunned, Villagrá crawled out, but his horse was
dead. For four days thereafter Villagrá tells us he staggered on, with
a favorite dog for sole companion, foodless and waterless, since the
snow had ceased and only the arid earth was visible. At length he laid
himself down to die, when by rare good fortune he was discovered by some
of Oñate’s men searching for lost horses. Carried to camp, and nursed
to health again, he played his heroic part only a little later in the
assault and capture of the great Sky City. By so narrow a margin has
posterity inherited his priceless history of the great adventure.

Don Vicente de Zaldívar, having arrived at San Juan, took over the
command of the colony as ordered. On the 18th of November, his brother
Don Juan started for his western journey, with thirty soldiers, to
join Oñate at Zuñi. Meanwhile the bitter disappointment of Zutucapán,
foiled by Oñate and again by Villagrá, had had time to ferment into more
diabolical designs against the next coming of white usurpers of the
land. As Zaldívar approached Ácoma, he was met by the cacique and his
confederates in friendliest guise. They seem not only to have urged the
Spaniards to visit their sky city but to have promised ample provisions
for the further journey. Quite unsuspicious of the evil in their hearts,
Don Juan with sixteen companions went up the steep footway in the rocks.
The others remained below with the horses. Still off-guard, Don Juan
allowed his men to separate on the mesa-top, beguiled by plausible
invitations to one or another point of interest.

And now we see the stage set for the tragic sequel. Bare rocky floor.
Grim eyeless blocks of building. An illimitable sky, grey and pitiless.
On one side a horde of fierce barbarians consumed by primeval passion
to resist the entry of an alien force. On the other, a handful of
white soldiers, who though armed can make no concerted defence because
they have foolishly drawn apart from one another. There is no path of
escape, no possible signal for help to those below. Suddenly a hideous
war-cry rends the air, and every Spaniard is assailed by mad savages
with war-clubs or is pierced with arrows. From house-tops huge stones
are hurled. Brave and alert, the Spaniards sell their lives dearly in a
terrible hand-to-hand struggle. Don Juan and Zutucapán meet in mortal
combat and the valiant officer falls beneath the blow of a massive
war-club. Swift and short we may believe the onset, till, breathless, the
few Spaniards still alive succeed in getting together. Wounded, but not
beyond effort, Captain Tobar and four of the soldiers, pushing and being
pushed, finally reach the edge of the abrupt cliffs at the same moment.
With a last desperate effort, and we may think by common though unspoken
consent, they determine to die by throwing themselves over the precipice,
since to die seems all that is left them. By what even then was deemed
a miracle, only one of the five was killed in that fearful jump of one
hundred and fifty feet. It is supposed that they must have landed on the
sand that is heaped at certain places against the base of the cliffs. At
all events, the other four were rescued by their companions below, and,
probably because of the fear still felt by the Indians for horses, the
camp was left unmolested by the victorious savages long enough for the
Spaniards to regain some strength; being under the overhanging rocks they
were safe from missiles thrown from above.

[Illustration: THE FORTRESS HOUSE OF ÁCOMA

_Fr. O’Sullivan_]

But fear lest this treachery of the Ácomas was only the prelude to a
general uprising of all the pueblos made the Spaniards decide to break
camp at once. Separating into small bands of three or four men, they went
by different routes, some to warn Oñate of his peril, and others over
the arid miles to San Juan, to provide such defence as was possible there
for the women and children.

The scheme succeeded, and by the end of the year 1598 all the Spaniards
in New Mexico were assembled at San Juan. Oñate, waiting at Zuñi for
Zaldívar, had become anxious, and had retraced his path so far as a camp
called El Agua de la Peña. There he was met by Bernabé de las Casas,[59]
“who with six companions had come with the sad news of the occurrence at
Ácoma, and of the death of Don Juan de Zaldívar with other captains and
soldiers.”[60]

A serious problem now faced Oñate. The Indians could not go unpunished,
nor must the plan of punishment fail—for should it do so, New Mexico
would have to be abandoned. Other pueblos, watching to see the result
of the revolt of what was considered by them an impregnable fortress of
their race, would certainly rise in unison, and there would result a war,
possibly one of extermination. There were available but two hundred white
men—whereas in Ácoma there were not less than three hundred warriors,
and some additional Navajos. Moreover, Oñate could use only a fraction
of his own force, because the other pueblos would assuredly rise if the
settlements of Spaniards should be left unprotected.

But war was inevitable, and Oñate showed shrewdness in first getting
opinions from the padres as to what constitutes a justifiable war, so
that he would be supported against all censure of viceroy and monarch
should his desperate case prove also a ruined one.

The reply of the _comisario_ and other priests is set forth in long
detail and is of eminent worth.[61] It seemed but just and fair that
the brother of the slain Zaldívar should lead the avengers of the
massacre—and to Vicente de Zaldívar therefore was given the command.
With him was Farfán, and another was the soldier-poet Villagrá, whose
rhymed history of the siege and capture of the redoubtable rock is the
basis of our information.[62] Oñate made the men a moving address of
farewell, cautioning them against an over-zealous spirit of revenge, and
recommending that they should all be confessed and receive the Communion
before they started on their perilous task. Only one man, not named,
refused, and so did not go.

Vicente and the dauntless _comisario_, Father Alonso Martínez, with a
band of seven captains and seventy soldiers, left San Juan January 12,
1599, and on the twenty-first arrived at Ácoma. They were greeted from
afar by the exultant savages, dancing stark naked on their cliff, while
their medicine men, hideously painted, beat the drums and hurled curses
and incantations upon the besiegers, and all the inhabitants joined in
shrieking insults.

Zaldívar came as near as he dared, and the notary through an interpreter
named Tomás, according to a prescribed and usual formula, thrice summoned
the Ácomas to surrender. Instead of meek obedience came a shower of
stones and arrows. The savages, certain of their own security, had even
rejected the counsel of some of their own men to remove the women and
children, and now howled defiance at the Spaniards.

    As horses, nervous and high-spirited
    Champ foaming bits, pawing the air and shattering hard rocks
    Into a thousand pieces beneath their stamping hoofs,
    So these proud savages all eager for the fray
    Begin the dance at once. Gaily at first,
    Then their blood inflamed by beat and rhythm
    With feverish spirit, most swift movements made,
    Tearing out gray hairs in frenzy of excitement,
    While with a thousand lightning leaps
    They crushed the rocks with their strong feet
    And spurred themselves to greater heat with cries
    So loud and terrifying that the hellish clamor
    Seemed like the lamentations of the souls
    Of all the injured ones of earth,—
    Not till the dawn did their wild dancing cease.[63]

While the hideous din of a war dance filled the night with sound, the
little band of courageous men encamped below the mesa and planned their
coming fight for supremacy.

Next morning, January 22, 1599, just two months after the massacre, with
their war-cry of “Santiago! Santiago!” the small force of only sixty
soldiers began the assault upon the fortress. They were met from above by
a rain of arrows and stones that did their deadly work. But this was only
a feint on the part of the Spaniards. During the previous night, under
protection of the darkness and the clamor of the war dance on the mesa,
the Spaniards had sent twelve men, chosen for their skill, with the one
and only cannon in their possession, to make their way up the southern
mesa. These men had crept stealthily around under the precipices and,
though hampered by heavy armor, had successfully reached a great outlying
ledge of rock on the uninhabited cliff of Ácoma, from which the other was
separated by a narrow but fearful chasm. This they determined to bridge,
and it took heroic effort.

Small pines which grew above the great precipices on the south had
been cut. With superhuman effort they were dragged down, and across a
troughlike valley, and then again up the perpendicular ledges to where
the twelve men were perched with their cannon. All this was done in the
night of the twenty-second. When the grey dawn came over the silent
landscape on the twenty-third, all but a dozen, left to guard the horses,
had joined their comrades, who were screened by pinnacles of rock from
the sight of the Indians. Here, according to Villagrá,[64] Father
Martínez offered the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. Engelhardt[65] adds,
“It was the first time that the holy Mysteries were celebrated on the
lofty peñol of Ácoma. During this Holy Mass, all the Spaniards received
Holy Communion: doubtless many supposed it was their Viaticum.” Then the
_comisario_ addressed the little band, adjuring them, while defending
Church and King, to be chary of wantonness in killing.

At a given moment the Spaniards chosen for casting a log to bridge the
chasm rushed forth, and luckily for them lodged its further end beyond
the gulf. To keep a footing on that crazy log in the face of stones and
arrows was no ordinary test of poise and daring. Unhappily, one man
caught the rope and pulled the log after him. With yells of triumph the
Indians fell upon the forlornly stranded group, when instantly an officer
(who was Villagrá himself) flew out from the crowd of his fellows on the
other side of the abyss and from its edge sprang into the air, clearing
the space, and landing, seized the log and thrust it back, so that it was
securely caught. Over it came pouring the Spanish soldiers.

Now the mesa top was again the scene of awful struggle and carnage—a
hand-to-hand, merciless fight with knives and clubs and arrows of
the savages, against the sword blades and gunstocks of the trained
Spaniards.[66] Neither side gave way though bleeding and trampled and
stunned, they fell to rise, or fell to die. But after a time the Indians
seem to have thought these were perhaps no mortal foes, and they
retreated into their fortress-like houses.

Having caught their breath, the besiegers at once began a fresh attack,
house by house. Into the narrow _calles_ they dragged the cannon, and the
adobe walls crumbled as the stone balls fell upon them. Soon fire ran
from house to house and the pueblo was doomed. But not until noontime
of January 24 did the Indians yield. Then their old men sued for mercy,
and Zaldívar at once ordered his men to cease. In fact, the Indians were
persuaded they had been defeated by supernatural power, and after the
surrender “they inquired for that valiant rider with the grey beard who
on a brisk white steed and accompanied by a handsome queen was helping
the Spaniards.”[67] The Spaniards, themselves hardly less given to
superstition, now believed that their patron, Santiago, assisted by the
Virgin, must have hovered, unseen, above them and brought them victory.

Thus ended the breathless, savage fight of a brave race for home and
children, a fight accompanied by a heroism and a disregard of personal
danger and injury such as few men have ever shown. Five hundred Indians
lay dead, and not a living Spaniard but carried his scars of that fateful
time to his death. According to Villagrá, the aged chieftain, Chumpo, who
had counselled before the battle that the women and children should be
removed from the Crag, was permitted to descend and settle in the plain.

The pity of it! Treachery had met its master, but we can hardly wonder
that bitter hatred was engendered between the races, for in addition
to death and fire and desolation, Zaldívar carried away eight of the
Ácoma girls to be educated by the nuns in Mexico. Was his idea that of
hostages to peace, or did he delude himself with the plea of Christian
“civilization”?[68]


AS TOLD BY AN EYE WITNESS

Dr. Bolton has generously given permission to include here his own
translation, as yet unpublished, taken from the “Itinerary from the Mines
of Caxco,” by an anonymous diarist of the Oñate expedition to New Mexico,
1596 to 1598. This diary wonderfully confirms the accuracy of Villagrá’s
rhymed history, and supplements it in various details, the most valuable
of which is the list, not given elsewhere, of names of those men killed
or wounded in the affray. The diarist’s account is as follows:

    _November 4th._—Captain Marquéz came from the Land of Peace
    (Mexico), and from Puaray he followed the Governor toward Ácoma.

    _November 18th._—On Wednesday, at midday, November 18, the
    _Maestro de Campo_ (Juan de Zaldívar) set out from the South
    Sea, following the Governor.

    _December 4th._—On December 4th he was killed at Ácoma by the
    Indians of that fortress which is the best stronghold in all
    the conquered country. With him were killed Captain Diego
    Nuñez, Captain Felipe Escalante, Ensign Pereyra, Arauxo, Joan
    Camacho, Martín Ramírez, Juan de Legura, Pedro Robledo, Martín
    de Riveras, Sebastian Rodríguez, and two servants: a mulatto
    of Damiero and an Indian. They wounded León Zapata, Juan de
    Olague, and Cavanillas, and twice stoned the royal _alguacil_.

    _December 5th._—On the 5th the _alguacil_ set out with three
    companions to report the matter to the Governor, who was in the
    province Zuñi and Mohoqui. He lost his way and returned on the
    6th.

    _7th._—On the 7th, Bernabé de las Casas set out with six
    companions to make the same report and deliver it to him
    ten leagues beyond Ácoma. This alone saved the men whom his
    Lordship had with him and who were returning to Ácoma with full
    confidence in them, and ignorant of the atrocities which had
    been committed by the Indians.

    _21st._—On the 21st, after having received this information,
    the Señor Governor returned to this pueblo of San Juan, where
    the main body of his camp and our Father Commissary now are.

    _January 12th._—On the 12th the Sergeant Major, with title of
    Lieutenant Governor and Commander of the companies, set out
    with seventy companions to punish the natives of Ácoma.

    _21st._—On the 21st, the feast of Señora Santa Ynez, the said
    Sergeant Major arrived with his soldiers, and with the carts
    and artillery, to besiege Ácoma, whose inhabitants they found
    prepared for war. They received our men by shooting arrows
    and other missiles at them, and with many insults. They
    appeared with some arms of the Christians whom they had killed
    there; and they would not consent to the demands made by them
    according to the instructions of his Lordship (Oñate).

    _22d._—Therefore, on Friday, the feast of Señor San Vicente,
    at four in the afternoon, all having confessed and made their
    peace with God, a feigned assault was made on one side of the
    rocks of Ácoma. When the people of the rock ran thither, the
    Spaniards went up on the other side. With brave efforts they
    captured the first small crag and other rocks and boulders,
    and finally came face to face with the enemy. They held their
    ground that day and night with great diligence and watchfulness.

    _23d._—On the next day, which was the feast of Señor San
    Ildefonso, as soon as it was daybreak, they began a pitched
    battle which lasted until after four in the afternoon. It was
    miraculous that so great a number of the enemy were killed
    without the loss of any of ours; and that the air was extremely
    favorable, for it was so cold that the arquebuses did not
    become heated, although the firing was continuous throughout
    the entire time. It was all the more miraculous considering the
    small number—less than fifty—who were on top of the rock, for
    the balance who made up the total of the seventy who went to
    this war, guarded the base of the rock on horseback, so that
    on the top of the rock there were ten of the enemy to each
    Spaniard. On this day the Indians of Ácoma saw an apparition of
    Santiago or of San Pablo. Lorenzo Salado met with an accident
    because of his carelessness in making the ascent.

    _24th._—On this day the 23d they surrendered, although the
    Spaniards did not enter the pueblo until Sunday the 24th, when
    they established a camp in one of the plazas. Then they began
    to capture the Indians, some of whom entrenched themselves in
    the _estufas_ (_kivas_) and underground passages of the rock,
    which was all undermined in every direction. Most of them were
    punished and killed by fire and bloodshed, and the pueblo was
    completely laid waste and burned.[69]




Chapter V

ÁCOMA REBUILT

    The missions were agencies of the state as well as of the
    Church. If the Indian were to become either a worthy Christian
    or a desirable subject, he must be disciplined in the rudiments
    of civilized life. The task of giving the discipline was
    likewise turned over to the missionary. Hence, the missions
    were designed to be not only Christian seminaries, but in
    addition were outposts for the control and training schools for
    the civilizing of the frontier.—BOLTON.


Ácoma, ruined and desolated, had now to be toilfully and painfully
rebuilt. It was indeed a desperate spectacle of crumbled rock, and
adobe—all that was left of what had been for untold years the habitation
and fortress of this Keres tribe. But the homing instinct of every
created being forbade its people to dream of anything else than a
reincarnation of what was to them their only refuge and dwelling place.
Saddened that their castle-crag was no longer so safe from violation as
they had always believed, these men and women took up their weary task
of reclamation. They were, indeed, all too familiar with the devastation
by Apaches of many a pueblo. These new foes were only men of another
color, centaur-like and made more invincible, it is true, by horrible
fire-breathing sticks that dealt deadly stings. But this was Fate.

[Illustration: ÁCOMA, LOOKING NORTHWARD

_Bolton_]

Once again we may watch in fancy the long procession of patient men and
women bringing on their backs adobes from the plain below, and timber
from far-distant San Mateo. Each heavy burden must be carried up the
steep, crooked trail. Yet by slow degrees the long adobe blocks of houses
did become habitable again, and life resumed its ancient sway. Little
wonder that for long thereafter the Ácomas felt deadly enmity for the
Spaniards.

In reconstructing a new life upon the ruins of the old one, we have
to take into account a new element—one so alien to all the Ácomas had
hitherto known that we shall do well to pause for some understanding
of the régime under which Spain adapted these primitive people to
civilization. High officials were aware that no soldier guard would
suffice. Here and now, as everywhere in the years to come, it was the
tireless persistence of fighting and teaching Franciscan friars that
proved the most successful means of keeping relations friendly with the
Indians.

The lesson taught the Indians at Ácoma was so thorough that the Spanish
rule was accepted by the other pueblos without further resistance.
From San Juan, Oñate moved his headquarters to San Gabriel in 1601.
Some eight years later Santa Fé was founded and made the permanent
capital. Colonists and friars now settled into a contented routine.
Before Oñate went off east in search of Quivira, he and the Father
Commissary distributed the friars among the pueblos in seven districts.
In the pueblos churches were built, monasteries founded, and schools
established. In temporal affairs the natives were put under a hybrid
system, part Indian, part Spanish.

The more one reads of Spain’s efforts in establishing her rule over a new
continent, the more impressed one must be by the use made of the mission
as a frontier agency. No one else has treated this subject with such
illumination as Bolton, to whose vivid essay I wish to acknowledge my
debt.[70]

Spain not only aimed at dominion, but conceived as well a broadly
humane policy toward the Indian. It was in Spanish America chiefly that
the Indians were preserved. Elsewhere they have mostly disappeared.
Spain aimed to convert, protect, civilize, and exploit the natives.
In the early days of the conquest their welfare was entrusted largely
to _encomenderos_ (trustees), who were charged with the care and
exploitation of the natives within large areas. The grants were
called _encomiendas_. But Mexico was a long distance from Spain. The
_encomenderos_, beyond the reach of the royal arm, fixed their attention
too much on profit and too little on their obligations to convert,
protect, and civilize the natives. Having abused their power, they
became discredited. As the frontier advanced to distant outposts, more
and more the _encomendero_ was supplanted by the missionary. By this
means more emphasis was placed on conversion and civilization, and less
on exploitation. The missions therefore became agencies of both State
and Church. Since they served the State, they received State support.
Each mission became not only a church and monastery, but a school of
discipline in which the rudiments of European civilization were taught.

The missions were usually provided with great enclosures, well defended
by high walls against forays of hostile Indians, and the discipline
therein enforced was an essential element in the Spanish policy. Even on
a barren mesa-top like Ácoma there is evidence of a monastic settlement
of considerable extent connected with the church, where the inhabitants
of that pueblo received daily instruction of some kind from the padres.

Not merely as teachers and preachers were the missionaries useful. They
served also as diplomats to win the Indians to Spain, as explorers to spy
out the land, and as reporters to make known the needs of the frontiers.

There are no more heroic annals in the world than those which tell of the
experience many brave and ardent priests underwent. The Conquistadores
were brilliant soldiers, but their story would be incomplete if beside
them had not walked these brown-habited Franciscans, who burned with
zeal to save the souls of the invaded country, and stayed on after the
soldiers had departed, to pursue their selfless task, coveting martyrdom
as their only personal reward.

A widespread impression exists that the Spanish conquerors were brutal,
and Spain’s further rule of this continent needlessly oppressive. What
are the facts? With any gift of imagination we have only to picture to
ourselves the problem confronting the Spaniards, in order to recognize
the enormous difficulties which practically offered but two alternatives:
either complete annihilation of the aboriginal race, or its gradual
training and absorption into a more coherent and civilized nation. “The
Spaniard, to his lasting honor, accepted the alternative of assimilation,
and although he sometimes faltered in his high purpose and was often
guilty of cruelty, oppression and the rankest injustice,” yet we have the
keynote of the Spanish system in the last will of Queen Isabella, signed
by her the day before her death, in 1504.[71] This will was quoted by
Charles V when he founded schools for the instruction of the natives as
early as 1550.

To close and summarize this sketch of the early Spanish régime, I quote
from Bolton:

    As their first and primary task the missionaries spread the
    Faith. But in addition, designedly or incidentally, they
    explored the frontiers, promoted their occupation, defended
    them and the interior settlements, taught the Indians the
    Spanish language, and disciplined them in good manners, in
    the rudiments of European crafts, of agriculture, and even of
    self-government.

In spite of the general unity of the aims of Church and State, the friars
and secular officials did not always agree. Royal agents on the frontier
were not altogether perfect. There were conflicts of jurisdiction and
many manifestations of the ordinary weaknesses of human nature. Such
differences arose in New Mexico at the very outset, between Oñate and the
missionaries. They marred harmony and impeded progress toward desirable
ends. But quarrels assume an exaggerated proportion in the early annals,
because they produced and left behind more voluminous documentary
evidence than times of peace.

So to the conquered pueblos Oñate and the Commissioners sent the
missionaries. Fray Andres Corchado was assigned to Ácoma, together with
Sía, Zuñi, Moqui and other towns. It was an enormous district for one man
to cover. Very little is known of Fray Corchado’s work in Ácoma. Hodge
concludes that no mission churches were built at this time. If that be
true, it is probable that no more than a temporary adobe was dedicated to
Fray Corchado’s use for lodgings and for church services in the Sky City.

For a time Ácoma was associated with no less a figure than the celebrated
Father Zárate Salmerón, historian of his own epoch in New Mexico. For
eight years Zárate writes that he “sacrificed himself to the pagans”
(1618-1626). Others call him “a great orator and an indefatigable
worker, who instilled fresh energy into his mission work.” Jémez was his
principal scene of labor; but he also served the Keres. Once at least he
visited Ácoma during a period of great hostility and it is recorded that
he succeeded in pacifying them for a season.

One of the interesting items in Father Zárate’s “Relación” is his attempt
to verify the current belief that there were Indians in New Mexico who
talked in the Nahautl language—that is, the language of the Aztecs. He
had been told, he said, by Captain Gerónimo Marquéz long before,

    how the first time he was on the great cliff of Ácoma he
    entered an _estufa_ and saw in it some Indians painted on the
    wall. As he recognized them for Mexicans (Aztecs) by their
    dress, he asked the Ácoma Indians who these might be that were
    thus portrayed. They replied that a few years earlier some
    Indians dressed in this fashion came there from the direction
    of the sea coast (the Pacific); and because such a thing had
    not hitherto been seen among them, they had painted them; also
    that from there the strangers had gone toward the pueblo of Sía
    of the Queres nation,

and thence to Jémez and so back to their own land. This must have
occurred in the time of Oñate, whom Marquéz accompanied. No modern writer
has ever mentioned even a tradition of such a decoration of the _estufa_.
Did it perish in the time of the great fight? Who can say? So far as
written, no white man has ever penetrated the interior of an Ácoma _kiva_.

The New Mexico missions now flourished. On Father Zárate’s
recommendation, in 1621 the province was made a _custodio_ and named
San Pablo. Father Benavides, an even more illustrious historian than
Zárate, was San Pablo’s first superior. At the end of five years he
reported sixteen friars in New Mexico and the astonishing number of
34,000 Indians baptized. This would be an average of a thousand each for
thirty-four towns.

Benavides, when he returned to Spain, wrote his precious “Memorial” on
the affairs of New Mexico. Like his predecessors and successors, he
notes the aloofness of Ácoma from the rest of the Keres, their kinsmen.
He writes that the Keres neophytes “are dextrous in reading, writing,
and playing on all instruments, and craftsmen in all the crafts, thanks
to the great industry of the Religious who converted them.” He does not
mention Ácoma by name in this connection. But if what he says applied to
them, we must assume that one or more padres had spent many a month of
patient labor on the top of the great rock.

Benavides was succeeded by Father Estévan Perea.[72] With twelve
soldiers and twenty-nine priests, in September, 1628, the new custodian
sallied forth from Mexico City for his charge. At San Bartolomé, Perea
writes, fifteen of their mules fled to join the wild herd; and were not
recaptured. But four extra carts were added here to the thirty-two with
which they had started.

On Palm Saturday, April 7, 1629, they reached the Rio del Norte, where
they gratefully lingered, since for three days they had suffered from
lack of water. The natives were friendly, bartering fish in exchange
for meat and maize. The party probably crossed the Rio Grande near the
present El Paso, and entered on the famous and much dreaded _Jornado
del Muerto_,[73] described as “the terror of all travellers; many a life
has gone out in an effort to cross the inhospitable stretch of eighty
miles.” According to Vetancur, the whole journey was made almost entirely
on foot. On their way up the Rio Grande one of the brethren died and was
buried at Robledo.[74] Further delay was inevitable to give the Father
suitable burial.

By Pentecost[75] (Whitsunday) the rest of the weary travellers had
reached Santa Fé. The friars celebrated their safe arrival by holding a
Chapter or business council. No doubt many important things were done in
that meeting. But one transaction, which alone would make the gathering
immortal, was the selection of the man who was destined to become the
Apostle of Ácoma—Fray Juan Ramírez.




Chapter VI

FATHER RAMÍREZ AT ÁCOMA

    _Though an host of men are laid against me, yet shall not my
    heart be afraid; and though there rose up war against me yet
    will I put my trust in Him._—PSALM 27.


Having first escorted Father Romero and Muñoz to the “bellicose and
warlike Apaches” to the east, Governor Silva prepared to conduct the
friars assigned to Ácoma, Zuñi, and Moqui. This, too, was enemy country,
and soldiers were taken along. Governor Silva was evidently proud of
his part in the re-establishment of the faith in the west, for on his
way both to and from Zuñi, he carved his name on Inscription Rock (July
29 and August 9, 1629), where it is still plainly to be seen. Silva’s
zeal for the faith is shown likewise by his deeds in Zuñi. There he
issued an edict that no soldier should enter any house of the pueblo,
nor transgress by ill-using the Indians, under forfeit of his life.
“Moreover, to make these people understand the veneration due to the
priests, wherever they met with Indians, the governor and soldiers knelt
to kiss the feet of the fathers, admonishing them to do likewise, which
the Indians did; so much as this the example of a Superior can achieve.”

From Santa Fé a cavalcade of thirty soldiers filled with a spirit of
high adventure, fully armed, and mounted on good horses gay with the
trappings of that period, set forth on June the twenty-third, 1629. Perea
writes that the soldiers were well armed in body, but the eight friars
were “much better armed in spirit.” Four hundred extra cavalry horses
followed close. Behind came ten wagons on which were loaded all the
essentials of food, munitions, and church equipment for such a journey.
They took the desert trail, marked out through the ages by the unshod
feet of the Indian himself—a trail we of to-day must likewise follow
almost as blindly since everywhere its course is blurred by drifting
sand. Watchful and wary of ambush, but stirring up great clouds of dust,
the cavalcade crossed the Rio Grande, and continued its way southwest. In
due time the weary hundred miles or more were covered, and the Peñol was
reached.

To their relief the Spaniards were given a friendly welcome. Probably the
spectacle of such a force, and a still potent memory of the tragedy of
the Crag in Oñate’s time caused the Ácomas to reflect, and to conclude
that, for the moment at least, discretion was the better part of valor.
The friendly reception was gratifying, for as Perea wrote, “by force or
by siege it would appear to be impossible to enter the place because of
its impregnable site. It is a cliff as high as Mt. Amar in Abasia or the
insuperable steep which Alexander won from the Scythians.”[76]

Governor Silva and his party continued west. At the Crag Father Ramírez
“remained at the avowed peril of his life—though this had been already
surrendered in sacrifice unto God—among these so-valiant Barbarians who
had on other occasions fought so well that the Spaniards knew to their
sorrow the courage and skill of their opponents.”

Born at Oaxaca, in the valley of Antequera, Juan Ramírez had taken holy
orders in the famous convent of Mexico. There his zeal in religious
teaching had brought him distinction, so “that he shed lustre upon the
Province” and was chosen to go with others of his Order to New Mexico in
1628. Vetancur expressly says that the march was made on foot over the
greater part of the six hundred leagues of the wild country, and that
because the supplies for their maintenance, furnished by the Crown, were
insufficient, “he and the other Religious lived upon what was given them
in charity along the way.”

When Father Ramírez heard that the fiercest and most rebellious of all
the tribes were those upon the Peñol at Ácoma, he besought the custodian
to be sent thither. This intrepid priest believed himself so endowed with
grace of heaven that he could succeed where during forty years Spanish
arms had failed. The legend is that he ascended the cliff, though with
great difficulty, having no other defence than his breviary and his
cross, and that so soon as he was seen by the savages, they pelted him
with enough arrows to destroy a dozen men, but not one even pierced his
habit—a thing so strange that even his would-be murderers thought it a
miracle and were sore afraid. Moreover, it happened that a little girl
of eight years was accidentally pushed over the brink in the tumult of
the riotous savages on the summit, and fell among the cruel rocks sixty
feet below. Ramírez went to her, knelt beside her, and prayed over her,
and soon led her quite unharmed up to her amazed kinsfolk, who received
her with fond caresses. Now they looked upon the Father as one more than
human and soon became his disciples. History does not always sustain the
poetic overlay of fact, for in this case the records say positively that
Ramírez was escorted to the Peñol by Governor Silva.

A second quaint story of a “Religious” who can be no other than Ramírez
is told by Benavides. The Father, after recounting his own success among
the Indians of Taos, writes as follows of the Crag of Ácoma, at that time
apparently hostile to the invading Spaniards:

    Returning, then, [once more] to the location of the Queres
    nation,—[after] proceeding twelve leagues to the westward
    of its last pueblo, Santa Ana, one arrives at the Peñol of
    Ácoma which has occasioned the loss of so many lives of
    Spaniards and Indian friends, both on account of its being
    a sheer impregnable rock cliff, and because of the valor of
    its inhabitants, who probably number two thousand souls. Last
    year, 1629, God granted that we should convert them to peace,
    so that to-day they have a Religious who is instructing them
    in the Christian faith and baptizing them. And the Lord has
    confirmed with a miracle the virtue of this holy Sacrament of
    Baptism. It was thus: A year-old infant was already breathing
    its last in the arms of its mother, who was even now mourning
    it for dead. The Religious who was there teaching them, said
    to her that if she loved her daughter so much she should let
    her be baptized so that if she were to die she would enjoy
    eternal glory in Heaven. And even though the mother was a
    heathen, she believed the Father and begged him to baptize her
    child. To this the Religious assured her, “Then have faith,
    daughter, since this baptismal water is quite able to revive
    your daughter.” And sprinkling it upon her and repeating the
    words, a marvellous thing happened, for the child immediately
    sat up well and sound, and took to her mother’s breasts. She
    turned very smilingly and cooingly toward the Father, showing
    by her actions her gratitude for the good he had done her since
    she was too young to talk. Thereupon all those Indians were
    confirmed to the Faith, and by devotion soon learned to pray
    in order that they might be baptized. May God be praised for
    everything.[77]

Some may discredit the two miracles of the children as treasured by the
Church; but others feel it to be equally miraculous that the personality
and ingenuity of one solitary human being could disarm the ferocity and
suspicion of barbarians such as these, win their confidence, make them
obedient to his teachings and induce them to adopt a better mode of life.
For in these things we have every reason to believe he succeeded so long
as he lived among them.

One wishes there were some vivid personal picture of this courageous
priest. The quaint phrase of the old chroniclers is too apt to convey
an idea of an elderly, grave, and wholly pious padre. But I suspect
that any man daring enough to undertake and carry through so hazardous
an adventure as this of Fray Juan was certainly in the prime of life. I
see him a lithe, muscular, forceful figure, resourceful in emergencies
and always fearless. We need not question nor minimize his zeal to save
souls if we also believe him gifted with a large share of practical
common sense, alertness to seize upon and adapt unusual incidents as they
offered, and a firm will that would impress and even awe the Indians.
A man in such circumstances must know a great deal besides the liturgy
and the confessional. Most of the Spanish priests were men of affairs in
one sense or another. They knew how to wield tools and guns as well as
the censer and the bell. They were adepts in a score of ingenious useful
ways of making life tolerable in the wilderness. How else could they have
endured the life there or taught their neophytes new methods of carrying
on improved horticulture, church building, and the like? Father Ramírez,
like other missionaries in this wild land, thought no danger too great,
no labor too mean or too arduous, no sacrifice too momentous, if only the
high purpose of civilizing and converting those entrusted to his charge
was achieved. All of them understood well that the first step toward
winning the confidence of these children of the forest and the desert was
to provide for their bodily welfare; and we may take for granted that
Father Ramírez was solicitous to give them more food and to teach them
how to use their natural resources to better advantage, even while he
was learning their language. Then would they in gratitude repay him by
repeating the prayers taught them and allow themselves to be “catechized
and baptized” as the chronicler tells us was the case. After a time, he
went down from the Crag, attended by his flock, apparently to visit some
of the other fathers at their posts. They, thinking he must long since
have met his death, were amazed to see these ferocious Ácomas changed
from “lions to meek sheep.”

We are next told that Father Ramírez built a great church on the top of
the mesa and enriched it with many decorations. Can we not visualize the
slow and laboring procession of moccasined men and boys coming painfully
up those difficult paths with loads of heavy adobe, and with huge timbers
from San Mateo Mountain to build their wonderful church? Fortunately
the Spanish padres allowed these new-found neophytes to combine in the
mission churches their own form of house-building with _motifs_ brought
from Spain. Consequently we find complete harmony in the simple lines of
the massive structures with their natural environment.

Dedicated as was the shrine on this bleak rock-island to St. Stephen,
we should like to think it had been consecrated in memory of the early
martyr whose stoning is described in the sixth and seventh chapters of
the Acts of the Apostles. Surely it would have been a fitting memorial;
but it is definitely stated that the patron saint of Ácoma was that King
of Hungary named for Stephen the Martyr, and canonized by Benedict the
Ninth because he had converted the Magyars from paganism to Christianity.

A monument which bears Ramírez’s name to-day is the roadway that he
caused to be constructed for easier access to the plain below. Down the
“Camino del padre” the visitor to-day may watch the burros go every
morning, to return at nightfall after a long day’s patient labor.

So the years wore on, twenty or more, years which we may picture among
the Ácomas as perhaps the most peaceful in their whole history since the
Discovery. Then, because of enfeebled age, the wise and good father was
carried back to Old Mexico and put into an infirmary to end his days, as
it was thought, in ease. But the old man yearned after his children and
could not be comforted. “Rivulets of tears coursed over his cheeks” as
he thought on the days of his active service among them. With prayer and
the Mass he filled his time as best he could, until, “full of years and
virtues he died in the year 1664 on the 24th of July, and was buried in
the Convent of Mexico.”[78]

In so many of the lonely places of service given by men like Fray Juan
a daily record was kept of what went on about them and of their own
progress with the Indians in their charge. None such has ever come to
light written of Ácoma. Is it possible that Fray Juan did not beguile his
infrequent leisure with any such jotting down of events? Will not some
one in some fortunate future day make the longed-for discovery of the
record of Ramírez’s life upon the Crag of Ácoma?




Chapter VII

ÁCOMA IN THE PUEBLO REVOLT

    _Souls made of fire and children of the Sun_
    _With whom Revenge is Virtue._

             —DR. EDWARD YOUNG, _Night Thoughts_.


Between Fray Juan’s departure for New Spain and the great Pueblo Revolt
of 1680, we have such unsatisfying scraps of information about Ácoma
that the hope is ever present of making some discovery of additional
manuscripts in the archives.

The same scarcity of detail applies as well to the whole Province of New
Mexico for the period between 1598 and 1680. Everywhere in this part of
New Spain the work of a whole century was blotted out by the uprising of
the latter year. All records in local archives, civil or religious, were
publicly burned and every symbol of the Christian Faith obliterated. The
visible token of this was exemplified by the cleansing in the Santa Fé
River of all Indians in the vicinity ever baptized by Christian padres.

The story of the Revolt, one of the most bloody and thoroughgoing this
country has ever seen, had important consequences not only upon the
Indians, but also upon the expansion of European civilization in this
country. The researches of Hackett have changed in some details the
accepted essentials of the uprising and therefore I have followed his
narrative. The reader is referred as well to the more easily attainable
books.[79]

The Spaniards had attempted to suppress not only the religious beliefs
and practices of the Indians, but also their ancient customs of daily
life so as to make something like Europeans out of these aborigines,
a custom we have heard not a little about in recent years among other
conquering nations. This resulted in New Mexico, as might have been
expected, in a steadily cumulative discontent which broke out in
rebellion several times between 1645 and 1675. All these abortive
attempts were quickly, and harshly, overcome. No punishment, however,
availed to make the Indians amenable to rule, and in 1675 Governor
Treviño determined to stamp out their evil practices for all time. Taking
prisoner forty-seven medicine men alleged to be guilty of sorcery, three
were hanged as an example to the rest, and the remainder were imprisoned.
After a time these latter were released. Among them was one from San
Juan, Popé by name. Embittered still further by what he considered
persecution in his own pueblo, he betook himself to Taos, northernmost of
all the villages on the Rio Grande.

According to Bandelier the rebellion was more easily incited because of
the disappointment the Indians felt in the failure of the new magic,
Christianity, to do better for them than their old creed had wrought.
No greater protection from their enemies, no more rain for their crops,
no less wind and blight for their fruits had resulted from the new
religion. Consequently Popé found it no difficult matter to make the men
of Taos believe him one given supernatural knowledge by three infernal
spirits in one of their _kivas_. In the _kiva_ Popé plotted the wholesale
destruction of every Spaniard in New Mexico, and afterward of every
symbol of their rule, so that the Indians might return to their own
methods of life and rituals of religion.

Popé was no ordinary Indian malcontent. He must have been a character of
unusual force, with keen understanding of his fellows, and with a real
gift for leadership. Let us even admit in him a sincere patriotism for
his ancestral heritage. Thus he imposed his supernatural claims no less
easily than his practical plans for the elimination of the conquering
people. At the time of the outbreak the Christianized Indians were
estimated at about sixteen thousand. To these Popé proposed to add a
large number of tribes occupying districts lying more than a hundred
leagues to the westward. This would include Zuñi and Hopi. By means of
secret council meetings Popé stirred up a general sentiment of revolt
over this great area and even succeeded in winning to his support the
Apaches,[80] up to now age-long enemies of all pueblos. The Indians had
learned through experience the necessity and the strength of unity,
through which, indeed, their success was accomplished. Only the chosen
leaders were allowed to know any details of the carefully systematized
plot until all was ripe for its operation. Popé’s chief assistants
were Jaca of Taos, Catití of Santa Domingo and Don Luís Tupatú of the
Picuris tribe, men speaking the same language and wholly in each other’s
confidence. Popé took such precautions not to be betrayed that when he
suspected his son-in-law, the Governor of the pueblo of San Juan, of
friendliness to the Spaniards, he killed him there in his own house.

At last all seemed to be ready. The Piros nation, being the only one that
refused to join the movement, was left in ignorance of its arrangements.
All the other tribes were informed of the day for the uprising by the
clever device of knotted cords carried from pueblo to pueblo by relays
of the swiftest runners. There has been some confusion about the full
significance of these knots but Hackett is convinced that each knot
merely signified a day. At each pueblo one knot would be untied[81] and
the number of intervening days indicated by those still in place.[82]
When the last knot should be straightened out, the Indians, wherever
situated, were to rise as one man, and descend upon their unsuspecting
prey, with the absolute order that no one—woman or child, priest or
soldier—should be spared. All the pueblos were to be surrounded by their
warriors, the mountain paths guarded and defended by Apaches, and if a
few Spaniards should escape, the Mansos, living near El Paso, were to
finish the slaughter as the Spaniards fled toward Mexico.

The moment chosen was particularly auspicious because the greater part of
the Spanish soldiery had been sent to El Paso to meet there the supply
train coming from Mexico under the leadership of Father Ayeta, with the
result that the colony was comparatively undefended.

The Spanish population was distributed in two districts—Rio Arriba
and Rio Abajo. The governor of the whole province, Don Antonio de
Otermín, lived at Santa Fé, the capital, situated in Rio Arriba, but
the larger number of the colonists were living at this period in the
southern district where the second in command, Alonso García, served as
lieutenant-governor.

Popé’s runners had met with a refusal, though the penalty was death, from
certain chiefs of San Marcos, La Ciéñaga and Tanos, three towns a little
south of Santa Fé. Two messengers, Catua and Omtua, were arrested and
brought to the governor. They confessed the fact of the general uprising,
but said they knew nothing of its causes, having taken no part in the
councils of the leaders of the northern pueblos.

Enraged by this treachery, the news of which spread like wildfire,
the Indian leaders were nothing daunted, and showed astonishing
resourcefulness in bringing about the attack prematurely. Those who
travel to-day over this wide, rough land by modern conveyance can hardly
credit the truth that the scattered pueblos were so quickly informed
of the nearly defeated conspiracy that they were able to rise almost
simultaneously by daybreak on August 9, two days earlier than was planned.

Those colonists living near the Taos and Picuris settlements were the
first victims; only two escaped and they eventually fought their way to
where García’s band of refugees were halted below Isleta. From tribe to
tribe, from settlement to settlement, the hideous slaughter was carried
forward according to program.

The very day of the outbreak General Otermín heard from three different
sources that a revolt of the tribes was under way, but he did not try
until the twelfth to “roll back the tide of rebellion,” being up to that
time unaware of the magnitude of the plot. By the thirteenth he and his
comrades realized how critical was their situation. Many of the Indians
were equipped with the guns of Spaniards whom they had already slain.
Completely cut off from the outside world, a fight was inevitable. The
Indians had successfully divided the Spaniards of Rio Arriba and Rio
Abajo and each of these divisions had been assured that their friends
were already dead.

All the Spaniards within the environs of Santa Fé, numbering about one
thousand persons, were collected within the precincts of the Palacio
Real. Otermín now told the religious adviser Father Gómez, to “consummate
the Holy Sacrament,” and bring to the governor’s house all church vessels
and adornments. For five days, between the fifteenth and the twentieth,
the Spanish colony was besieged within the royal precincts. There were
only about a hundred men capable of bearing arms, whereas the warriors
amounted to at least two thousand. At daybreak on August 20, the small
Spanish force rushed out from the Palacio Real, taking the Indians by
surprise. A few hours’ struggle accomplished their conquest. Three
hundred were killed, forty-seven captured, and the rest escaped by flight.

García, unable to reach his chief, rescued a large number of colonists
in Rio Abajo, very few of whom, however, were able to bear arms. Just
as Otermín was assured that none of those in the other division had
survived, so was García deceived about the true fate of his friends, and
after consultation with his subordinate officers he had decided that a
retreat to Mexico was the wisest course. His colony of refugees started
in that direction on August 14. By the twentieth he learned that he had
been duped concerning the fate of Otermín’s contingent, and called a halt.

Meanwhile, by August 21st Otermín learned from captured Indians, not
only that the whole region from Taos to Isleta, fifty-one leagues, was
devastated, but what was more cheerful, that García’s colony had not
been sacrificed.

By this time Otermín also realized that the condition of his survivors
was hardly less critical than when they were besieged, and gave the order
to march toward Isleta, where he hoped to find García, who, as we know,
had already moved on. It was not until September 13 that they joined
forces at Fray Cristóbal, and after some further marching and conferring
a place called La Toma del Rio del Norte[83] was agreed upon for a
temporary settlement from which tidings of their terrible reverses might
be sent to the viceroy in New Spain.

Father Ayeta, custodian and _procurador-general_, was one of the great
figures of the place and period. For a long time priest at the famous
church in Cholula, he had been transferred to the New Mexican diocese.
At this time he had been absent from the missionary field for nearly two
years, having gone back to get help for the priests in the province.
They were in sore need of men and horses, food and ammunition, to
defend themselves against constant raids by the Apaches. Father Ayeta
left Mexico City, September 20, 1679, with twenty-eight wagon loads of
supplies and a goodly contingent of men and horses. Almost exactly eleven
months later he arrived at El Paso (August 25, 1680), to be met by the
disastrous tidings of the revolt and of the supposed fate of all the
Spanish colonists.

Otermín had sent, some weeks earlier, a troop of thirty men under Pedro
de Leiva to meet Ayeta at El Paso and give him necessary convoy for his
supply train up river. Under the changed condition of affairs Ayeta
hurried Leiva off with a part of the train to succor such fugitives as
might be yet alive. Also an Indian runner was sent ahead with a letter
to García informing him of the coming of the relief train. García was
found at Fray Cristóbal on September 4, and sent the runners back the
same day with messages for Father Ayeta. While these men were resting on
a mountain off the main road they espied Leiva coming up the river. After
signalling to him that the lower camp was but nine leagues farther on,
the messengers went on their way and carried to Ayeta his first news that
not all the settlers in the north were dead. Ayeta was the real savior
of the refugee colonists. As soon as he had despatched the messengers to
Otermín, he busied himself “at El Paso in making meal, hardtack, cocinas
and bullets.”[84] In response to further requests from Otermín he, a
little later, attempted to go to El Paso. The river was in flood and to
cross it at “the ford” was impossible. The slow progress of the mule
wagons on the west shore of the river was a discouragement, and on the
morning of September 18, Ayeta determined to risk the supplies by fording
the swollen tide. But the water was deeper and more dangerous than was
foreseen and in mid-stream the wagon stuck fast. Ayeta, whose very life
was in danger, cut loose the mules, and they gained the shore. Otermín’s
men, by now arrived upon the east bank, saw the desperate plight of the
heroic Father, swam out to the wagon and bore him on their shoulders to
safety. This was at a halting-place named La Salineta.

Hackett says Ácoma at this period was the largest of all the Keresan
pueblos, having a population of about fifteen hundred Indians, but
“too far removed from the sphere of activity of the valley pueblos to
exert much, if any, influence upon them,” and, according to the Spanish
documents of 1680, it was also too far to coöperate successfully in the
revolt. However, “Otermín learned from the Indian besiegers of Santa Fé
that all the Spaniards there were dead.”[85]

We may be sure that although the Ácomas, because of their remoteness from
the centre of the great revolt, played no very conspicuous part in it,
they were in full sympathy with the movement, for we are told that they
burned all the emblems of Christianity, putting to death in some nameless
fashion, their priest, a Franciscan padre, Lucas Maldonado.[86]

During one of Otermín’s unsuccessful attempts to win back the territory
of Spain he was told that Ácoma and Jémez were in arms and organizing an
attack upon the granaries of Isleta, with the further purpose of killing
the Indians there because they were friendly to the white men. Mendoza,
_maestro de Campo_, had arrested Catití, one of Popé’s associates, and
endeavored in public assembly to win his surrender to the pacific terms
offered by the governor. But the listening throng of Indians, in which
every tribe but Moqui was represented, made such warlike protest that it
was futile. A few days later, however, pacts of peace were formulated and
messengers were sent to Ácoma with this news.

Many of the Rio Grande pueblos were utterly destroyed while others
were weakened beyond any recovery of their early strength. Bandelier
says that of the forty pueblos in the eastern part of the Rio Grande
valley, the only ruins that can be identified are Ako, Galisteo and Gran
Quivira; and of sixty pueblos of the southern section, not one is in
existence, though there are a few of later date. Because of his failure
to reorganize the province Otermín lost his post as governor. Others
who followed him had no better fortune, or did not attempt the task,
with the result that the ancient pueblo rule held its supremacy for the
following twelve years. No doubt the Indians believed themselves forever
freed from foreign domination, but they did not long keep peace with each
other, and inter-tribal wars broke out almost immediately. After the
_débâcle_, Popé assumed powers and demanded honors almost identical with
those the Spanish governor had employed, with the inevitable result that
his rule became in its turn oppressive and was resented by his whilom
followers.[87] Deposed, then re-elected, Popé soon died.

From all these occurrences we may be sure that the firm intention of
at some time permanently conquering and ruling New Mexico was never
abandoned. At length there arose the man ambitious, capable, dauntless
and resourceful, a soldier and a leader of men, Diego de Vargas, who
carried to victory the thorny task of establishing the over-lordship of
Spain in the disrupted province. It was in 1692 that Vargas, with a small
force of eighty-nine men, entered the country. If he met on the whole no
very serious resistance from the pueblos, to whom the result of their
great struggle for independence had been well-nigh as disastrous as to
the invader, he likewise found it no pastime, for it was not until late
in 1696 that Vargas could really say he had attained his goal. Hence we
see that the Pueblo Revolt was actually a matter not of one year, 1680,
but of continuous hostility and struggle for sixteen years.

As the general approached Santa Fé it was Tupatú, the third firebrand of
1680, who, dressed in Spanish clothes, rode to meet Vargas upon a Spanish
horse. The chieftain brought promise of submission from his own tribe,
the Tewas, but warned the General that the Keres, Pecos, Jémez and Taos
people were rebellious and prepared to resist. From Santa Fé, Vargas
proceeded westward to Isleta. On the third of November, 1692, he and
his little army marched along a “bad bit of road” from a watering place
called El Pozo (The Well) where they had camped, to a spot from which the
hill of Ácoma was pointed out to him. Shortly afterward he writes, “We
descried the smoke made by those traitors, enemies, treacherous rebels
and apostates of the Queres tribe.” These epithets suggest that Ácoma had
given evidence once more of peculiarly recalcitrant behavior. From this
time on the Peñol appears to be the hotbed of sedition until its complete
subjugation was achieved.

Five squadrons of soldiers were called up while Vargas halted “in view
of the other great Rock, on the right side of the road and slope which
appears to be higher.” Could this be Katzímo? Arrived within musket-shot
of the Crag, the cry of “Hail” was exchanged between the Spaniards and
the Indians on the mesa. Through an interpreter Vargas endeavored to
persuade the Ácomas that he had come for no other purpose than to pardon
them for past offences. But they were unconvinced, though friendly
Indians were sent to tell the Keres how genuinely their forgiveness had
already been granted to other pueblos. At length the Spaniards were
permitted to mount the sandy slope, only to find at the top that the
entrance to the village was barricaded and made impassable.

[Illustration: EL MORRO, OR INSCRIPTION ROCK

SOUTH SIDE, LOOKING EAST

_Bolton_]

[Illustration: THE INSCRIPTION OF DE VARGAS ON EL MORRO

    Aquí estaba el Genl Dn. Do. de Vargas quien conquisto a nuestra
    Santa Fé y la real corona todo el Nuevo, Mexico, a su costa de
    año de 1692

    “Here was the General Don Diego de Vargas who conquered for our
    Holy Faith and for the Royal Crown all New Mexico at his own
    expense [in the] year of 1692.”

_Courtesy of the A. T. and Santa Fé Railroad_]

After long delay the messengers of peace returned to the point where
the Spaniards were impatiently awaiting news. One of them, a Zuñi, named
Ventura, and called “the Wolf,” brought as gifts watermelon, cooked
pumpkin and cakes, but also the unwelcome message that the Ácomas would
hold council that night and send their answer next morning. In vain
Vargas used arguments to hasten affairs. The Ácomas warned him that the
Apaches were lying in wait to kill him and all his force. There was
nothing for it but to camp that night at the watering place, a league
distant.

Next morning, the 4th, the Wolf was despatched with fresh offers of peace
and the Holy Cross, only to return about ten o’clock with the verbal
reply that the Ácomas would talk with the general on his way back from
Zuñi! Exasperated by this subterfuge, Vargas reconnoitred to see whether
there was enough available water near by “to subdue the enemy on said
Great Rock, the strength of which is unassailable.” Finding no water,
Vargas made the ascent of the sand-ramp a second time, only to find the
face and trenches of the mesa crowded by a multitude of its inhabitants.
Again the Ácomas were assured of the peaceful intent of the visitors.
Their chief, Matthew, an educated Indian, made answer that his people had
been warned of quite different designs. Vargas now dismounted, followed
by his secretary and the military chiefs. They seated themselves upon
flat stones near the fortified entrance. Rising to his full height he
proposed that Matthew should swing himself down over the barricade,
while Vargas and his few attendants would go on foot up the “impossible
part of the approach.” The Indians seem to have agreed to this and there
was general embracing when the two companies came together. Vargas then
describes the flat top of Ácoma as divided into three sections, and along
“the side of the Square a large race-track.”

Here was enacted one more of those picturesque ceremonies that we should
like to visualize. Vargas stood upon the arena of that sanguinary
struggle for possession of the Rock in Oñate’s time, almost a hundred
years before, the memory of which we may be sure had been transmitted in
fadeless colors through the generations. Only half convinced as yet that
more disaster was not in store for them, tremulous and all unknowing what
such forced submission might entail, the dusky throng of primitive folk
knelt before the royal standard of Spain and watched the captain of the
post of El Paso as he planted the Christian Cross in their midst.

Chief Matthew, acting as interpreter for these invading strangers, told
them, as he was bidden, of the great sovereign so far away that they
would never see him, yet so all-powerful that he claimed their land,
their allegiance, their very lives for his own, while at the same time
professing to advance their own best welfare.

Bewildered, supine before their leader, they made no protest when
Matthew raised aloft the standard and pledged their fealty to this
unknown Spanish king. Here, too, where only twelve years before the
last Franciscan father had met his martyrdom in some unconfessed horror
of revengeful hate, these native people, some of whom were doubtless
participants in that crime, saw two other padres, garbed even as the one
they had foully done to death, bidding them repent and promising them
absolution of all their misdeeds. By a rite they understood somewhat
better, the little children were next given baptism. No doubt the general
in his handsome accoutrements was an awesome figure as he stood godfather
to Matthew’s child and later to various other infants. Strange and moving
scene, fraught with pregnant possibilities!

This business finished, De Vargas once again became the practical
director, and in haste to make up for the delay these suspicious people
had occasioned him, he wheeled about with a brief command that crosses
should be erected at the pass and that prayers be said by the people
before the cross now in the square, each day at sunrise and at sunset.
Before he might descend to the plain a visit must be paid to the church
and the titular saint of the pueblo. Vargas describes St. Stephen’s
shrine as of great extent with walls “almost a yard and a half in
thickness which stand firm in spite of the heavy rains that break the
windows and skylights.” This controverts the ordinary statement that the
church had been entirely destroyed in the Revolt of 1680, and makes it
probable that in 1699 the ancient edifice was only restored and did not
have to be entirely built anew.

De Vargas gives hearty thanks to God that he with “barely fifteen
men,”[88] including his secretary and officers, had succeeded in the
conquest of this most difficult of all pueblos. He mentions the cisterns
on the summit, from which Ácoma is supplied with water. He was evidently
impressed by the contrast of their abundance with the plight of his own
force, for he says that as he made his way back to camp he felt no little
anxiety as to how he should find them. When he arrived he found that his
men during his absence had cleared out a nearly dry spring sufficiently
to give their animals some water. Next day Vargas went on towards Zuñi.
All through 1693, though some Keres villages aided Vargas, Ácoma was
insubordinate, and early in 1694 made an alliance with Moqui, Zuñi, and
certain Apaches.

By the end of 1694 New Mexico was believed to be once more pacified.
The Franciscans busied themselves with the erection of new churches and
other needful buildings. The Indians, however, continued restless and
mutinous—a condition according to the padres due to Vargas, who had
created hostility by appropriating for the use of the Spaniards fertile
lands belonging to the natives.

At the beginning of 1696 the missionaries were once more appointed to
their several charges, but in a rather long list the name of Ácoma does
not appear. Everywhere in the region the Indians were growing sullen
and hostile because of a famine that was decimating their population.
As early as March the priests became aware of serious danger, through
outrages perpetrated in the churches. Though appealed to for help Vargas
would do no more than grant them permission to go to Santa Fé, if
afraid to stay at their posts. Some went, but more of the missionaries,
resenting the thinly veiled implication of cowardice in the curt refusal,
stayed where they were and paid the price with their lives. On June 4,
came the crisis. Five pueblos of the Rio Grande rose, killed the padres
in residence and twenty-one other Spaniards. Abandoning their homes the
Indians fled to the mountains. Ácoma was deeply implicated. Neither
baptism nor kneeling at the cross morning and night had much availed to
change the nature of this wily and treacherous tribe. Four days later the
general received a letter from the senior captain of the Keres, governor
of the village of Santa Ana, in which he described a meeting held at
Ácoma where the warriors were waiting reinforcements from Moqui, Zuñi and
the Utes. A little later Fernando de Chaves, senior judge of Bernalillo,
sends the confirmatory intelligence that “a multitude of people and the
trail of women are seen going toward Ácoma, wherefore we are taking every
precaution.” Rebel smokes were watched by the Spaniards to see from
what points the attack would come. On the twelfth Vargas heard from
Don Felipe, governor of the Pecos, and certain friendly Indians, that
throughout all the previous winter emissaries had gone from village to
village, “not omitting the remote friendliness of Ácoma, the provinces of
Zuñi and Moqui, to instigate a general revolt.” Two informants, men taken
at Pecos, though one was from Nambé, were made prisoners and put through
a grilling examination. In course of their confession it developed that
“the Zuñis, Moquis and Ácomas were expected in their village of the Pecos
to join the others and march upon Santa Fé. Furthermore, these three
backed by the Apaches had advised the killing of all grown Spaniards,
sparing only little children.” The priest of Jémez, Fray Francisco de
Jesús, some Spaniards at San Juan and Nambé and certain friendly Indians,
had already been massacred. The Indians from Ácoma and other villages
had now fortified themselves at Chimayo, where a steep mountain ridge
made approach on horseback impossible. As soon as the fields should be
sowed all the nations were to unite, led by the Apaches, whose first task
was to get possession of all the Spanish horses. Hunger had driven the
Indians from San Cristóbal (one of the villages taken by Vargas from the
natives) and they had sought refuge at Ácoma and at Zuñi.

On June 13 the second Indian prisoner, in course of a searching
examination, confessed that the Keres of all the villages, and Ácoma,
were already joined on the ridge of Sandía to attack the Spaniards who
lived at Bernalillo, and from there were to go to Los Cerrillos. “They
said to the young bucks, this day is already dawned and all must fight
like men.” When asked how often he had been to Ácoma, the prisoner denied
ever being there more than once, and then not for the purpose of any
discussion.

Apparently the attack upon Santa Fé was halted by the rise of the river;
but the General had further information that although “the Moquiños,
Zuñians and Ácomas had now returned to their pueblos, in one hundred days
they would come back,” when all the nations would unite in the uprising.
A few days later Vargas learned from a woman of the Keres village of
Sía that the Indians were trembling with fear because of the discovery
of their plots. Consequently no renewal of this concerted action seems
to have been undertaken. A fierce fight partly in San Diego Cañon and
partly near San Juan, in which eight Ácoma warriors were killed, no doubt
daunted their confidence in their own immunity, for the alliance between
Ácoma, Jémez, and Zuñi was soon after dissolved. Ácoma still unsubdued,
Vargas marched once more against the fortress city, but being unable to
storm it, retreated, after taking prisoner five warriors, and destroying
the crops.[89] Just as happened after the great revolt of 1680, the
Ácomas, because of their remoteness and inaccessibility, were treated
with less severity than was the case with most tribes, so again no
further punishment appears to have been meted out to the Peñol.

Throughout the year there was need of constant watchfulness and active
defence by the Spaniards, but this revolt of the summer of 1696 was the
last serious one that occurred. Henceforth the more peaceful occupations
of colonization were resumed with but little interference. The mutinous
Keres of the Sky City, seeing all the other pueblos submitting to white
rule, could do no otherwise, and on July 6, 1699, they yielded to General
Cubero. Thereafter peace reigned in Ácoma, although in 1702 Captain Juan
de Uríbarri and L’Archeveque[90] were sent there to investigate a rumored
conspiracy.




Chapter VIII

THE WONDER-WORKING SAN JOSÉ

    I choose the glorious St. Joseph for my patron, and I commend
    myself in all things singularly to his intercession. I do not
    remember ever to have asked of God anything by him which I did
    not obtain. I never knew anyone who, by invoking him, did not
    advance in virtue; for he assists in a wonderful manner all who
    address themselves to him.—THE LIFE OF SANTA TERESA.


Eighteenth-century items about the mission of Ácoma so far available
are brief and laconic. In 1703, General Cubero was having a difficult
experience with the Moquis, who were trying to incite the Zuñis to
revolt, with the result that both pueblos were eventually abandoned to
the aborigines. Padre Miranda wrote from Ácoma that the Indians of that
pueblo and of Sía wished to go to the rescue of the priest, but that he
would not allow it, fearing immediate death for the padre if the Zuñis
heard of an approaching force.[91]

In 1713 both Ácoma and Laguna threatened their resident priest with death
because of his interference with their native rituals. In a report made
by Father Menchero in 1744 we are told that

    The Ácoma mission is thirty-four leagues from the capital
    toward the west. It has one hundred and ten families. It is
    situated upon a large rock on which they have made reservoirs
    for water which they carry to the top. A priest ministers to
    them and applies himself to the catechizing of the Indians who
    come peaceably to the mission.

Ten years later, from a letter by Father Trigo,[92] we glean a few more
scraps of information.

    Five leagues from the mission of the Laguna in the same western
    direction is situated the mission of San Estévan, upon a large
    rock whose height is more than 300 _varas_, and on the top,
    which is very flat, is the church, the convent, and all the
    houses. They give the priest all the mutton which is needed,
    a bell ringer, a porter, two boys for the cell; the cook,
    and two millers for the wheat, of which they sow ... three
    _fanegas_[93] for the Padre and an _almud_[94] of maize at a
    distance of four leagues from the mission on ground belonging
    to temporal authority, because they have neither irrigation nor
    other land for this work. So with these labors and not having
    any tithes (_ovenciones_) the Minister always lives in want.[95]

The church was more or less neglected through the years, but in 1710 it
was restored and the mission was again opened, with the patron saint
changed from San Estévan to San Pedro.[96] In 1776 Father Garces, on his
journey from Mojave to Moqui wrote from Oraibí that there was “a padre at
Ácoma and one at Laguna.”[97]

Ácoma mission had a daughter. And, as sometimes happens, mother and
daughter did not always agree. This daughter was Laguna. The pueblo
of Laguna did not exist in Oñate’s time, nor for nearly a century
thereafter. It was founded in 1699 near a lagoon which has since dried
up; hence its name. Unlike almost every other pueblo settlement, it was
not a homogeneous colony, but was compounded of people from Ácoma and
Sía, who were Keres, others from Zuñi, and still others from pueblos
of different languages. It became, nevertheless, a daughter mission or
_visita_ of Ácoma. The boundaries of the two pueblos were defined after
a fierce battle at Sía between the Indians and the Spaniards in 1699 in
which the Keres were conspicuous. After the smallpox epidemic of 1780-81,
the headship of the mission was transferred to Laguna, since which date
Ácoma has been the _visita_ or branch.

The battered and almost indiscernible painting of San José that now hangs
near the high altar of the Ácoma church became a bone of discord between
these neighbor towns.[98] The picture is said to have been presented to
the Ácomas by Charles II of Spain. It gradually acquired a supernatural
fame, and came to be a talisman against misfortune of every kind. With
it Ácoma prospered. The people of Laguna, who had thrived by no means so
well, grew envious, and believed their poor crops and their childless
women would be bettered if they also had a miraculous painting.

A solemn meeting of the head men (_principales_) of Laguna was held.
It was decided that they should ask the older colony for a loan of the
miracle-working San José. The Ácoma _principales_ held an equally solemn
council. They at last agreed to loan the precious canvas for one month,
but were explicit about its return at that time. With much rejoicing
and the utmost care, the holy “foster-father of Jesus” was carried over
the long, rough trail. As Laguna came in sight, out trooped the whole
population with hope and reverence, to meet the saint. Duly installed
in the Laguna church, day after day, the picture received the humble
devotion of the people. When Holy Week came it was carried in procession
throughout the pueblo, followed by the devout inhabitants.

As the story goes, from this moment the fortunes of Laguna changed. The
sick became well, the crops were good, and a wholly different atmosphere
prevailed. But now no one was willing to part with the blessed talisman.
The Ácomas, weary of waiting for the return of the picture, sent
messengers to ask the reason for the delay. They got no satisfaction.
Angered by such bad faith, there was talk of an immediate raid upon
Laguna. The parish priest, Fray Mariano de Jesús López, the last
Franciscan ever to be in charge of the Ácoma mission, averted war. He
counselled that a conclave be held of the _principales_ of both pueblos
and the cause of the trouble discussed. The conference met. After a
solemn mass it was agreed that they should draw lots for the picture.
No one suggested that St. Joseph might not approve of gambling. Twelve
ballots were prepared, eleven of which were blank, and on the twelfth was
a rude sketch of San José. All twelve were shaken up in a jar, and one
little girl from each of the two pueblos was chosen to do the drawing. On
the fifth drawing the Ácoma maiden drew the saint. “So,” said the Father,
“God has decided in favor of Ácoma.”

Ácoma was happy, but Laguna was not, and one morning when the people went
to pray before their saint in the great Ácoma church, lo! he was not
there. Terror, dismay, and wrathful vengeance filled the hearts of all
Ácoma. By some ruse Laguna had stolen the patron saint. War assuredly
would have resulted had not Fray Mariano once more found a way out.
Ácoma ere this had passed from Spain to Mexico and from Mexico to Uncle
Sam. Father López counselled that the whole matter should be taken to
the United States court at Santa Fé. His advice was followed. The first
decision was made in favor of Ácoma. Laguna appealed the case to the
Supreme Court. In 1857 Judge Benedict affirmed the original decision in
the following words:

    The history of this painting, its obscure origin, its age, and
    the fierce contest which these two Indian pueblos have carried
    on, bespeak the inappreciable value which is placed upon it.
    The intrinsic value of the oil, paint and cloth of which San
    José is represented to the senses, it had been admitted in
    argument, probably would not exceed twenty-five cents; but
    this seemingly worthless painting has well-nigh cost these two
    pueblos a bloody and cruel struggle, and had it not been for
    weakness on the part of one of the pueblos, its history might
    have been written in blood.[99]

Rejoiced at this victory, the men of Ácoma started for Laguna to recover
their picture. Even to-day, says James, when they can be induced to tell
the tale, they affirm that halfway “they met San José with his face
turned homeward.” He had already heard of the decision and started alone,
but being weary he had stopped beneath a tree to rest, and there was met
“by his happy people going to fetch him home.”

Although the Indians have voluntarily accepted much of the Christian
practice of religion, their ancient paganism has never been uprooted. A
concrete illustration of their reluctance to accept the faith of their
conquerors is found in an _Entrada of Moqui_ by Mariano Rodríguez de la
Torre, 1755, entitled:

        A PECULIAR STORY CONCERNING MOQUI CONVERSION[100]

    I have told the series of events and will not omit one which
    happened in Ácoma, with an old Indian of another pueblo, who
    told me this:—The Moqui have set the time when they may be
    Christians, which will be when they have finished making a
    board upon which they put a mark each year. This board was
    started with a mark the year of the uprising [1680]. While it
    is not filled up with marks they will not submit.

    May the Holy Will of His Majesty be fulfilled. Amen.

    _Santa Domingo Mission.
    11th July, 1770._




Chapter IX

ÁCOMA AND THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT

    Once only Indians lived in this land. Then came strangers
    from across the Great Water. No land had they. We gave them
    of our land. No food had they; we gave them of our corn. The
    strangers are become many and they fill all the country. They
    dig gold—from my mountains; they build houses—of the trees
    of my forests; they rear cities—of my stones and rocks; they
    make fine garments—from the hides and wool of animals that eat
    my grass. None of the things that make their riches did they
    bring with them from beyond the Great Water; all comes from my
    land, the land the Great Mystery gave unto the Indian.—It was
    meant by the Great Mystery that the Indian should give to all
    peoples. But the white man has never known the Indian.—HIAMOVI,
    CHIEF AMONG CHEYENNES AND DAKOTAS.[101]


In 1863 seven of the pueblo governors went to Washington to see the
Great Father and to settle with him the question as to the boundaries of
their land grants, and very probably other Indian problems. After their
conference, Lincoln presented each governor with a silver-headed cane,
upon which was engraved as below, varying only as to the name of the
pueblo:

                               A. Lincoln
                               Prst. U.S.A.
                               Ácoma
                               1863.

The cane is passed to each succeeding governor upon his election in
January, and constitutes his badge of office. When he is absent it is
given to the man who represents him. On our second visit to Ácoma in
1922 we saw it hanging on the wall of our host’s living-room, since the
governor was temporarily away from the pueblo. In a sense, therefore, the
government of the United States is represented in the election ceremony
each year at seven of the New Mexico pueblos, of which I have learned the
names of only four, besides Ácoma—Isleta, Tesuque, Taos, and Zuñi.

In an attempt to learn wherein the laws and courts of the United States
government coincide or conflict with such a local pueblo organization
as has been outlined in Chapter XI, I have read the annual reports of
the Commissioner for Indian affairs from 1854 to 1920, but with no very
satisfactory result. Up to 1875, apparently, the only resource the Indian
agents had, when crimes and disorders occurred, was military force.
In 1915, murder, assault with intention to kill, arson, and burglary
were under the jurisdiction of American courts, but the commissioner
stated that our citizens were not thus safeguarded against many other
misdemeanors, some of a serious nature. This dual control results in a
divided allegiance in government as in religion among the pueblo peoples
and must induce infinite difficulties on the one hand and deceptions
that are truly deplorable on the other. Throughout these Reports,
however, it is interesting and gratifying to find that praise of the
Pueblo Indians is almost universal. They are described by commissioner
after commissioner as being as “different from the Indians of the Plains
as light from darkness,” or “as men of a wholly different race.” The
adjectives “loyal,” “generous,” “honest,” “industrious,” “amiable,”
“eminently self-supporting,” are constantly used to describe the village
peoples.

In 1867 the commissioner regrets that since the “marauding Indians” have
to be placated so often, “these very friendly and deserving people” have
become “ill at ease” and distrustful of our government agents because our
promises to them are not kept. In 1874, the commissioner protests that
the failure to produce order among the Indians is “largely attributable
to the fundamental failure to treat the Indian as a man capable of
civilization and therefore a proper subject of the Government and
amenable to its laws. At the same time tribal government has virtually
broken down by contact with the United States” and he specifically
recommends “qualified citizenship.” In 1915 Cato Sells, the commissioner,
writes: “The Indian has demonstrated his capacity for intellectual and
moral progress amid conditions not always propitious,” and in 1917 he
declares that the time has come “for discontinuing guardianship of all
competent Indians and giving closer attention to the incompetent so as to
fit them to transact their own affairs and control their property.” Such
a procedure would leave the Indian assured of full personal rights, quite
free to work out his own destiny, while relieving the government of a
large number of wards and placing at the same time, before those Indians
left under guardianship, an incentive for progress and true ideals of
citizenship.

[Illustration: A NAVAJO HOGAN

_Bolton_]

The World War did much toward impressing the Indian with the truth
that his welfare can only be advanced through opportunity to share the
benefits accruing to our free and self-governing nation. “The Indians
signally honored themselves” by the part they took in war activities, but
the commissioner dissented from the proposition to make of them separate
units in the army. “I want the Indian to go into this conflict as the
equal and comrade of every man who assails autocracy and ancient might,
and to come home with a new light in his face and a clean conception of
the democracy in which he may prosper and participate.” In 1920 he adds
that the recent attitude of our government has been “sympathetic, humane
and definitely practical,” and recognizes the Indian as “the first and
hyphenless American, with quick intellect, glowing spirituality, ardent
love for his children, and faithful to his promises”—until betrayed.
In his tribal state, all his training was individualistic; the good of
the whole was not definitely sought for. “In our policy of absorbing
the Indian into the body politic,” we must educate him to care for the
welfare of society, but we “must take into account his peculiar endowment
which is his social heritage,—religion, art, deftness of hand and
sensitive esthetic temperament.” A most interesting piece of information
in the Report is that “Indian soldiers and sailors honorably discharged
from service in the World War may be granted citizenship by Federal
courts without affecting their individual or tribal property rights.”

But, immediately the question arises, have the educational privileges
offered the Indians since the United States took them over as its wards
been such as would fit them for citizenship? Everyone knows that under
Spanish rule the mission schools directed by the padres did excellent
civilizing work and that under Mexican independence these schools
were less well supported. The United States assumed control in 1846,
twenty-two years later. In 1868 the commissioner reports that “there
is not a single school nor mechanical shop” in existence, that parish
priests who formerly resided in the pueblos have “long since given up any
such ideas,” and that there are no government farmers: in short, that the
Indians “have been steadily retrograding” since they became the wards
of the United States—a melancholy statement indeed! In 1872 the report
states that the Indians have been granted 439,664 acres of land, and
that there are five schools conducted to teach the children the English
language. In 1920, three fourths of all Indian children are said to be
in school where their studies are “pre-vocational and vocational with an
elimination of needless studies.” “The increased attendance of Indian
children in state and in public schools will eventually take them out of
Government Indian day and boarding schools.”

In following up this matter more specifically as pertaining to Ácoma,
we find the Indian agent reporting in 1897 that there were fifty-five
children on the mesa, but no school. The building formerly used by
Catholic missionaries for a school-house was used by the United States
in some other way. In 1917 the agent again reports “no school at Ácoma
but one at Acomita. If the mesa is still to be inhabited” he recommends
that a school should be installed there, but admits that “because the
people are most unprogressive, the situation demands the utmost tact and
ability.” In 1919, the agent says that “of 150 children of school age
but 19 were in attendance at Acomita and that the Ácoma people are very
backward, almost resentful of anything being done to assist them. So long
as there is opportunity for them to remain in isolation at the peñol of
Ácoma, where almost anyone can be safely hidden in the cliffs and escape
from the influence of law and authority, there is an opportunity for them
to evade their duties and responsibilities. Much as Ácoma appeals to me,
as it must to anyone having the least regard for history and sentiment,
I believe that to minimize its importance is an important step in the
progress of these people.” This agent’s remedy would be to increase
permanent school facilities at Acomita and exert “proper pressure” to
make the children attend.[102]

I was told in 1922 that all children not at Acomita are sent to
Albuquerque or Santa Fé, but it was fairly obvious that a good many
of the younger ones can get no regular teaching whatever, since their
parents migrate too frequently between the mesa and the farm villages.

The long procession of the years has produced but little material change
in Ácoma. Very few references to this pueblo occur in government reports
and such alteration as one notes is in the increased hostility of the
mental attitude of its people toward the white man. Its geographic
isolation from other pueblos is matched by its aloofness in every other
respect. No matter at what point of mental or spiritual contact we
attempt some _rapprochement_, we are now met by closed doors and our
knocking gains no entrance. Yet it was not always so at Ácoma.

Lieutenant Abert, who was, in 1847, a member of the Advanced Guard of the
Army of the West, says, in his “Examination of New Mexico,” that when he
had gone to Ácoma from Laguna,

    we entered some of the houses and the people received us with
    great gladness. They brought out circular baskets, nearly
    flat, filled with a kind of corn bread or _guayave_. It bears
    a striking resemblance to a hornet’s nest and is as thin as a
    wafer. [After describing the rock and the houses he goes on
    to say], these people appear to be well provided with all the
    necessaries and luxuries that New Mexico affords. They are
    quiet and seem to be happy and generous.

[Illustration: THE PUEBLO OVEN]

On their way to the rock his party overtook or passed many Indians going
thither with burros heavy-laden with peaches, and on the summit the men
urged the Americans to eat all they wished of this delicious fruit. It
was carried to their _azoteas_, or roofs, where, cut in halves, it was
spread to be dried in the sun. Compare such cordial friendliness and the
spirit shown in the Indian agent’s report in 1919, and ask yourself, why
this change?

How ardently one wishes the Ácomas might believe in our sincere sympathy
and would respond as the Zuñis and Hopis have done, who say they wish us
to know about their beliefs and their rich legacy of tribal lore, if only
we will record it “straight and true”; or, as the High Chief among the
Cheyennes and the Dakotas is quoted in that delightful book by Natalie
Curtis Burlin:[103]

    I want all Indians and white men to read and learn how the
    Indians lived and thought in the olden time. A little while and
    the old Indians will no longer be, and the young will be even
    as white men. When I think, I know it is the mind of the Great
    Mystery that white men and Indians who fought together should
    now be one people.

Or, as Short Bull, a Dakota medicine man, phrased it (when the Federal
government forbade the Ghost Dance movement and, in order to enforce this
mandate, massacred three hundred men and women of that tribe),

    who would have thought that dancing could make such trouble.
    For the message I brought was peace. We went unarmed to the
    dance. We are glad to live with white men as brothers. But we
    ask that they expect not the brotherhood and the love to come
    from the Indian alone.

I should like to incorporate here entire the splendid appeal of
Commissioner Francis E. Leupp, for the development of the Indian along
the lines of his own genius. His protest against the idea of the white
philanthropist, that the Navajos should be supplied with power-looms to
advance their particular industry of blanket-weaving, contains more irony
than is often found in official reports. Mr. Leupp sums up the situation
in the following words:

    The Indian is a natural warrior, a natural logician, a natural
    artist. We have room for all three in our highly organized
    social system. Let us not make the mistake in the process of
    absorbing them, of washing out of them whatever is distinctly
    Indian. Our aboriginal brother brings, as his contribution to
    the common store of character, a great deal which is admirable
    and which needs only to be developed along the right line. Our
    proper work with him is improvement, not transformation.[104]

After one has learned from very varied sources how tragic is the gulf of
misunderstanding that has yawned between the races, one asks perforce,
was it necessary, and if not, why did it happen? Even in the days of
their early and difficult adjustment to the new rulers who came and took
their lands, their corn, their freedom, there was much of kindliness
and receptivity among the Pueblo Indians which the centuries of white
over-lordship has turned to bitterness and hostility. One cause of
their distrust has been, besides our bad faith in smaller matters, the
encroachment of our race upon the lands assured them by the Spaniards,
grants long ago confirmed by the United States. But the more vital hurt
has come from the total misapprehension by white men of the significance
of their “dances” and their withdrawals to the wilderness for fasting and
prayer. The contempt shown for their rich heritage of poetic ceremony
has wounded the Indian in his deepest and holiest susceptibilities,
especially when this criticism is accompanied by a Federal ban upon their
periodic festivals, upon their native costume, and limitations upon their
freedom in pursuing their crafts and their whole manner of life. One is
forced to conclude that we have not yet, as the governing race, really
understood the task or the responsibility that we assumed in taking over
as wards human beings with an individuality highly sensitive and highly
developed. If the two paths so long travelled at cross purposes by the
two races shall ever converge and become but one, we may be sure the
gain will not all be to the Indian. His poetry, his art, his music, his
religion, are all fraught with infinite suggestions from which the white
man may well learn to his profit.

Yet in spite of so much expert testimony through the years, the United
States Senate in the autumn of 1922 passed a bill that is the most
injurious to the Indian of all that the Federal government has ever been
besought to make the law of the land. Unless there can be substituted for
the Bursum Bill[105] something permanently protecting and effective, it
would be more humane to make brief work of the complete annihilation of
the Indian race by standing up the tribes, one after another, to face a
firing squad of the army.

The writer has been told by well-informed men in the East that, unless
some thorough and honest remedy for the present situation is carried out,
an explosion is bound to come. That the Indians themselves will choose
to die fighting, after the tradition of their race, rather than by slow
starvation, is hardly to be wondered at or condemned.[106] The Paiute
uprising in 1923 is only the first torch of what we may expect to hear of
here, there, anywhere, like the signal fires of the ancients, till all
the Indian country is aflame.

And when the beacons are all put out, and there remain only silence and
ashes, we, the ruling race, proud of our superior intelligence, will have
deliberately and completely killed the only original contribution by
America to the art of the world.

This chapter may be fitly closed with

                     THE APPEAL OF THE ÁCOMAS

    The Ácomas held here, this 13th of November, at Acomita, in
    the year 1922, a meeting; there met the Chief of Ácoma and all
    of his principal men and his officers. Willingly we will stand
    to fight against the Bursum bill, which by this time we have
    discovered and understood.

    Our white brothers and sisters: This bill is against us, to
    break our customs, which we have enjoyed, living on in our
    happy life.

    It is very much sad, indeed, to bear, and to know, and to lose
    our every custom of the Indians in this world of men.

    Therefore we are willing fully to join to the others our
    Pueblo, where we may beat out the Bursum bill for the benefit
    of our children and of our old people and of all our future.

    We have held a meeting, assembling yesterday in the school
    house all day long. The meeting was very good. Every person was
    sworn and each did say that he is willing to help right along
    from now on.

    Yes, sir, we are all glad to do so to help through the name of
    our great God and to help those who are trying to stand for us,
    our American honorable people.

    This is all very much appreciated, and thanks for the help, and
    signed with all our names: we the chiefs of said Ácomas.

    Signed:

        Lorenao Watshm Pino
            Chief Ácoma (thumb print)
        Santiago Sanches
            Chief Ácoma (thumb print)
        Santiago Juancisco
            Chief Ácoma (thumb print)
        Diego Antonio Valle
            1st Principale (thumb print)
        Fraustin Salbador
            2nd Principale (thumb print)
        Santiago Watshm Pino
            Principale (thumb print)
        Francisco Marino
            Principale (thumb print)
        Antonio García
            Principale (thumb print)
        Lorenzo Routizin
            Principale (thumb print)
        James D. Valle
            Principale (thumb print)
        John Brown
            Principale (thumb print)
        Diego Anotonio Showety
            Principale (thumb print)

    _Elected Officers_

        Lucieino Peyetemo
            Rules (thumb print)
        Juan L. Sanchez
            Rules (thumb print)
        Santiago Hawey
            Rules (thumb print)

    _Officers of the Pueblo_

        Juan Pablo García
            (thumb print)
        José Louis Valle
            (thumb print)
        James Brown
            (thumb print)
        San Juan Shurtewa
            (thumb print)
        Thomas Lucio
            (thumb print)
        Henry C. Routzin
            Governor (thumb print)
        John C. García
            Interpreter
        James H. Miller
        Frank Ortiz




Chapter X

ORIGINS AND MIGRATIONS

    The aboriginal migrations of man in the Southwest may be
    roughly likened to the spread of vegetation or to the stocking
    of regions by animals from a center of distribution. Two great
    movements can be detached, one setting from the Rio Grande
    toward the west and south, and the other from the Gila toward
    the north and east. An objective region for both was the valley
    of the Little Colorado which offered an attractive home for all
    the tribes.—FEWKES.


From primeval times there were in the Southwest four geographic regions
to which the aborigines naturally gravitated, because of their favorable
river systems. These were the basins of the Rio Grande, the San Juan, the
Little Colorado, and the Gila. “Here the ancient ruins are most numerous,
and life seems to have been more active and intense than elsewhere.”[107]
The ancient pueblo region extends from Great Salt Lake southward into
Mexico, and from the Grand Canyon eastward to the Pecos River. This
region comprises 150,000 square miles. In certain portions of it ruins
are to be found by the thousands. Usually they are clustered together in
villages, but there are, besides, scattered ruins that probably indicate
outlying settlements on the farm lands of the community.

Prehistoric migrations were due to various causes. Preëminent among them
was the search for water, that primal necessity of existence. The need of
salt for men and animals was another factor in the choice of settlement
of aborigines as well as of the later frontiersmen.[108] New Mexico,
Arizona, and the Great Basin are peculiarly rich in saline deposits,
which no doubt had their part in attracting population.[109] Salt might
also be a cause of emigration. Fewkes shows that land long irrigated may
become so saline as to be useless for agriculture, and he says, “This
cause was perhaps more effectual than human enemies or increased aridity
in breaking up the prehistoric culture.”[110] The hostility of neighbor
clans or neighbor tribes often drove tribes to positions that could be
more easily defended.

The routes of migration can be traced by the ruins of the more or
less temporary settlements which were constructed on the way. These
ruins, too, give us a clue to origins. They are of two types, compounds
and pueblos. “Compounds are clusters of houses (or their ruins) each
arranged on a platform bounded by a surrounding wall ... while compact
blocks or rooms, each without a surrounding wall, are clan houses,” or
pueblos.[111] From the differences in architecture of these two forms
of habitations, and still more from the differences in pottery in the
village mounds, Fewkes deduces two sources of aboriginal immigration into
the valley of the Little Colorado, with a resulting mixed culture. One
stream of these home-seekers went westward down the San Juan; the other
moved northward up the Salt.[112] The southern culture came later than
that from the east, but was effectual over a wide area. Its northern
boundary is near Hopi. Eastward it extended to Ácoma, which, says Fewkes,
is “regarded as the Eastern limit of southern Gila influence, and marks
one point on a line of demarcation of the dual influence which merged at
Hopi and Zuñi.”[113]

The careful research of one of the latest students of pueblo pottery, Dr.
Leslie Spier, brings out the fact that

    migration records are but little more than suggestive
    indications of former inter-tribal relations. Simply to state
    the sequence of their occupation is to tell in the lowest terms
    of the migrations of their erstwhile occupants. If we know the
    history of the pottery art, though only in its barest outline,
    we know at once the time relations between the ruins.

To illustrate, Spier found, in the ruins of the vicinity of modern Zuñi,
two general types of pottery. Since the sherds of any particular ruin
belonged to only one class he was able to establish the historical fact
that the Hálona of Coronado was the present Zuñi, and that the settlement
across the river, where are now the trading stores, had been abandoned
long before that period.[114]

The sequence of the many ruins near Zuñi bears the same relation to that
pueblo that those of the Galisteo Basin do to Ácoma. There is, in fact,
a Zuñi tradition that, shortly before Fray Marcos discovered Cíbola,
its people had conquered some small Keres villages toward the south and
southeast, had adopted some of the survivors and incorporated some of
their ritual dances with its own, which are still performed. Was it from
these that Zuñi sent colonists in 1699 to found—with other tribes—the new
pueblo of Laguna?

Wherever they have studied early civilizations, scholars have been wont
to consider that the nature of the country finally settled upon had no
inconsiderable influence upon the forms of buildings there erected.
Fewkes believes that “the cliffs in which are the ruins of the Navajo
Monument favored the construction of cliff dwellings rather than of open
pueblos.”[115] Caverns large and small, trees for beams and rafters,
in short, all the conditions for cliff communities are there. It is
incredible that the same conditions would not have had an effect as well
upon the arts and crafts. The fantastic shapes into which the summits are
eroded, and the great columnar forms of awesome size, cannot have failed
to impress the primitive mind, developing conceptions of supernatural
forms and agencies.

Priority of origin between cliff dwellings and those on the level soil
is an interesting question. The earliest villages were probably in river
valleys or near small streams at the foothills of the many mesas. Later
the Pueblo Indians removed to the more inaccessible sites on the summits
of the mesas for protection from the nomad tribes who constantly harassed
them by predatory raids upon their flocks and crops. The aboriginal
Indians probably lived in detached houses, grouped more or less according
to clans, or to the neighborhood of their planting fields. Gradually a
more compact village or pueblo existence was found essential to protect
the agricultural Indians from the nomad tribes. There are writers who
believe, in accordance with the fond tradition of the native peoples,
that the oldest villages on low ground were evolved from cave and cliff
dwellings. Santa Clara, for example, in a flat region close to the Rio
Grande, claims the cliffs of Puyé for its ancestral home as well as its
temporary refuge in times of danger in later eras. On the other hand,
Dr. Hewett[116] writes that he has indubitable proof that this claim
is only one of many ruses employed by the Indians to secure their hold
upon increased territory. No doubt in times of emergency Puyé was used
by Santa Clara, but the “nation” never originated in these lofty cliff
dwellings. In the case of Walpi the removal from the lower levels to the
mesa top occurred within the historic period; Ácoma, we know, had been
on its cliff summit long before the first white man saw it, nor has any
record yet been found that does not connect it with the top of the great
crag. At whatever period this change occurred from life on the arable
ground-level to these easily defended cliffs, there must have resulted
a fundamental change in the organization of existence. Permanent houses
would be built only on the high stone table-lands, while the farms would
be supplied with merely temporary dwellings. In some cases these farms
would be actually overlooked, as at Walpi, by the mesa pueblo, or, as at
Acomita, be a dozen miles distant from Ácoma.

Since most Pueblo Indian ceremonial exists to implore help for the
increase of the fertility of all created things, including the increase
of human beings, all important rites and dances take place either before
the time of planting or after the harvest is gathered; consequently the
summer settlements rarely, perhaps never, had _kivas_ or ceremonial
chambers; this fact is an aid in determining the temporary or permanent
character of the ruins scattered over the plains.[117]

Various were the causes for the abandonment of these prehistoric
dwellings. Some of the houses found were evidently of only temporary
usefulness—way-stations in a pathless wilderness. Some settlements
perhaps were near water sources long since overwhelmed by drifting
sand. Prolonged drought often was the primary reason for moving. The
hostilities of other tribes would drive a people from a location not
easily defended. The failure of grain crops or of other nutritive or
medicinal plants would generally be considered a sign from the gods
that the place was accursed. Any prolonged disaster, whether it were
drought, or flood or disease, was usually attributed by the Pueblos to
witchcraft. Many secret crimes committed in retaliation have contributed
slowly but surely to the depopulation of whole villages. The pueblo of
Sía is said to owe its decline in comparatively recent time to constant
“inter-killing going on for supposed evil practices of witchcraft.”[118]
Originally, it is believed by some writers, the two divisions of the race
known as those of the Plains and those of the Pueblos were one and the
same, the Pueblo Indians being merely “fragments” of wandering tribes
left behind on both banks of the rivers that coursed through the plains.
Differing environments effected great contrasts in the lives of the two
peoples. The hunting of the buffalo largely determined the habits of the
Plains Indians. That animal furnished a steady supply of meat in contrast
with what could be got by the Pueblos from the occasional hunt of small
game; his skin dried in the sun made an excellent tent, in place of the
brush or adobe shelter; his fur made warm and durable clothing, whereas
the Pueblos had to depend upon wool and cotton garments. From the horns
drinking-cups were fashioned.[119]

Since moving on from point to point in early times was so much the
habit of all Indians, the marvel is that these migrating bands stopped
in a region so unpromising and infertile as the Great Basin, where the
human struggle for existence is of such incalculable proportion that the
imagination grows weary; but stop they did, as innumerable pueblo ruins
bear tangible witness. By its very aridity the sedentary Indians were
assured of a certain protection from their enemies, who would not be so
much attracted to the desert as to more luxuriant regions.[120] True,
this land of sage and sand, of greasewood and the burning sun, can be
made to flower like a garden, with sufficient water, but the infinite
labor required daunts the mind.

Since the outcome of migration is more or less permanent settlement, some
allusion to the adaptation of the Indian to the natural environment in
which he elected to remain is pertinent here. If upon the flat plain,
his adobe of pinkish yellow or brown sinks into the sandy background
and seems a mere outcropping of the rounded hills close by; if upon
the mesa-top, the houses look as if carved from the cliff itself and
defy all approach. The lack of all domestic animals among the Pueblos,
a notable fact, was of course a very serious handicap to them. Until
the Spaniards brought the horse and the sheep into the country in the
sixteenth century, the infrequent dog left behind by the nomad tribes
and used by the Pueblos as an accompaniment of the chase was their only
four-footed domestic animal. Castañeda notes as an uncommon sight the
wolfish dog which the Plains Indians harnessed to carry heavy burdens of
transport.[121] He also wrote that the pueblo people assured him they
kept the turkey only for its eggs and its feathers, but he could not
believe it, since the Spaniards found that bird such good eating.

Other points of contrast between the sedentary and nomad Indians are full
of interesting suggestion. But we can here indicate only in a superficial
way the most patent of them all. The Pueblo Indians, having established
themselves in a latitude and at an altitude highly favorable to
civilization, made more rapid progress in agriculture and the arts than
their kindred “nations” farther north. But on the other hand, wandering
over great distances trained the nomad Indian to much greater quickness
of eye and other sense perceptions, and also developed a more sinewy and
alert body. Change of scene increased his knowledge of other parts of the
continent and taught him how to cope with innumerable difficulties on the
way, of which the Pueblo Indian knew nothing.

The Spaniards coming north from Mexico found the Pueblos a backward
people relatively to the Nahuas and the Mayas, but leading a peaceful,
agricultural existence just as they had done for hundreds, possibly
thousands, of years, and having developed at the same time a culture
of many sorts that suited their needs and satisfied their hearts.
This culture included an architecture ranking high among “Pueblo
Arts” and characteristic of the mesa country which produced it, where
building-material was to be had for the taking.

One form of expression of their art is found in the pictographs on the
cliffs and _kiva_ walls intended to communicate a kinship of ideas
between tribes who could not understand each other’s speech. It is not
believed that these pictographs were at all like the ideographs of the
Central American peoples. They generally delineate natural objects,
most often animals, and while they may sometimes record events, like a
victory in war, or indicate the special shrine of the antelope or the
serpent, they are for the most part thought to be merely the beginnings
of pictorial art characteristic of all children and of races in their
childhood. The archaeologists and ethnologists have thus far gathered
so few positive data about the Ácomas that their racial origin is still
wrapped in mysterious and romantic legend. But so much as this is agreed
upon: the Ácomas are a people of one race, the Keresan,[122] composed
of many clans, some of them related to those who settled in the Tusayán
region.[123] They entered this great valley from the Gila, and form the
most eastern group of its influence and seem from the very first to have
been in continual conflict with other peoples. They were apparently at
once attacked and forced to defend themselves, and forthwith chose the
most inaccessible rock they could find, whereon to build an impregnable
fortress-city from which other tribes could not dislodge them.

Cosmos Mindeleff considers Ácoma’s position on a mesa summit unusual, and
thinks it due to the fact that, “like the wilder tribes, its people were
predatory upon their neighbors.”[124] The actual date when the Pueblo of
Ácoma began its life upon its fortress-rock we shall probably never know,
but all are agreed that it was very ancient in Coronado’s time (1540).

Lummis asserts that Isleta and Ácoma are the only pueblos on sites
occupied in Coronado’s time; but in another place he says that he
was told by the Ácomas that “a generation ago” drought forced their
inhabitants to form a colony at Isleta. Bandelier says: “With the
exception of Ácoma there is not a single pueblo standing where it
was at the time of Coronado, or even sixty years later, when Juan de
Oñate accomplished the peaceable reduction of the New Mexican village
Indians.”[125] Again he writes that such fragments of Ácoma tradition
as could be gathered pointed “to the north as the direction whence that
branch of the Queres originally came, and of the Pueblo of Sía on the
Jémez River as the place where they separated from the other Queres.”
Since it is true that much Ácoma tradition assigns their origin to a
separation from the main Keres nation at Sía, it is rather curious that
Mrs. Stevenson[126] makes not the slightest allusion, in her exhaustive
memoir, to Ácoma or to any tribal connection between Sía and Ácoma.
After this separation they drifted “to the Southwest across the bleak
valley of the Rio Puerco, and dividing into two bands, established
themselves in small pueblos to the right and left of Cañada de la Cruz
and on the mesa above Acomita, twelve miles north of their present
village.”

On both sides of the Cañada de la Cruz toward Laguna there are mesas with
ruins which Ácoma claims for its ancestors. This supports their tradition
of having drifted hither in several small bands, which settled separately
and then consolidated—on Katzímo, or on Ácoma. This would be the place
and time for their use of the Mesa Encantada.

Acomita is still part of the cultivated land belonging to the Ácomas.
Thither nearly the whole population has migrated every summer for
generations, and some of them now live there the year round. It is
twelve miles in a straight line north of the peñol and occupies fertile
bottomlands of Blue Water Creek. Pueblito and McCarty’s are other
stretches of adjacent farming country occupied in the same way by the
Ácomas. Here they raise enough wheat, corn, chili, beans, peaches, and
melons for their use, and have some to barter for other necessities.
Bandelier considers it uncertain whether these fields were cultivated
when Espéjo came there in 1583, because the distance of “two leagues”
that Espéjo gives does not agree with the present position. May it not
rather be an incorrect measurement?

Other associations of the Ácoma tribe with the surrounding countryside
are more definite. At Cebollita[127] the ruins are believed to be
Spanish, but with an Indian origin. They belong to a series of ruins
scattered at irregular intervals along an ancient trail of seventy miles
leading from Ácoma to Zuñi in regular use in the seventeenth century.
There are indications that it began to be used after Ácoma had been
founded, or at least after the Ácoma tribe established itself in the
vicinity,[128] a proof that there was regular communication between
the pueblos to the far west and those more centrally located. This is
the trail described by Hernando de Alvarado and Fray Juan de Padilla.
As Castañeda does not mention that these men suffered from any lack of
water, it seems certain that they passed no inhabited villages, but only
a desert waste which the nomad raided at pleasure. From Ácoma onward,
pueblos were seen at short distances from one another, thus requiring of
the traveler more caution and a slower progress.

[Illustration: ON THE OLD TRAIL TO ZUÑI

_Bolton_]

The Ácomas call Cebollita, Ka-uni-a, but strenuously deny all knowledge
of its builders. This trail after passing Cebollita passes another
“rancho,” Cebolla, and thence to the south of El Morro (Inscription
Rock), and the headwaters of Zuñi River in an almost straight line to
Zuñi hot springs, where is Ahacus or Háwikuh, which by some early
students of the tradition was confused with one of the many ways of
spelling the aboriginal name of Ácoma.[129]

Bandelier examined an isolated cliff-house two miles due south of Ácoma,
with walls of yellow clay in perfect condition. The rocks showed caves
and partition walls, and there were rock-paintings and rude carvings on
large detached blocks not far from the ruins. The Indians denied all
knowledge of them save that they were older than their ancestors, but a
boy guide told Bandelier that the painting was the work of the Koshare
(delight-makers) of Ácoma. Here they also found plume-sticks, which
showed it to be a sacrificial place in actual use.[130]

Fewkes[131] believes that in the early migrations there was some close
relation between the ancestors of the tribes now at Hopi, who are
Shoshonean, and those at Ácoma, who are Keresan, and who do not to-day
acknowledge such a connection, since they speak two different languages.

The Antelope Chief at Walpi is the authority from whom Fewkes learned
that in the Hopi Snake legends the Tcá-ma-hia[132] (a Keresan term),
or ancestral hero of the Puma or Snake clan, left the Snake people at
Wukoki on the Little Colorado, to seek other clans emerging from the
underworld. He was told by a war god at So-tcap-tu-twi to go westward. He
did so and met those clans at Ácoma, where he joined them and where their
descendants live. The relations between Tcá-ma-hia at Ácoma and the Snake
clan at Walpi seem never to have been broken.[133] At the biennial dance
there are placed around the border of the sand mosaic of the Antelope
altar eighteen smooth, light-brown stones called Tcá-ma-hia, which are
looked upon as ancient weapons representing the warriors of the Puma
clan of the Snake phratry. During the altar-songs one of the priests of
the Sand clan, who are said to have lived at Wukoki with the Snake clan,
beats on the floor with one of these stones, keeping rhythm with the song
and the rattles. It is a telegram to Ácoma for the Tcá-ma-hia to join
them in the Snake ceremony. He arrives on the evening of the eighth day
at the subterranean Moñ-Kiva. Tcá-ma-hia is then present at Walpi next
day to act as Asperger (Nahiapüma) at the _kisi_ (brush shelter). While
throwing out the charm liquid to the six cardinal points, he calls out
the Keres invocation to warrior gods: _Awahia, Tcá-ma-hia, yomaihiye,
teimahaiye_. His dress and speech are not Hopi but of an older stock,
and the whole impersonation undoubtedly is meant to recall the ancestral
wanderer of Keresan blood who left the Snake people to be joined at Ácoma
by other clans.

There is said to be a ruin on the now uninhabited mesa of Awátobi called
A-Ko-Kai-Obi (place of the ladle) which is also the Hopi name for Ácoma.
At all events, there is every indication of former association of the
Puma and the Snake clans of Hopi and Ácoma.

There is so much that seems to connect Hopi (Tusayán) and Ácoma (Keresan)
in prehistoric times that it is difficult to resist the temptation to
quote the whole creation story as told to Fewkes at Walpi, because of
its innate poetry; but so varying are the details in the several Tusayán
pueblos that we dare not assume the identity of any one of them with a
place as far away as Ácoma. We must be content with referring the reader
to the legend as related by Fewkes, quoting here from it only the Ácoma
detail.[134]

    While we were living at Wu-ko-ki (Great house) one of the
    Tcá-ma-hia dwelt with us, and then he left us, and traveled far
    to the southwest, looking for other people that he knew were
    coming up from the under world. When he reached So-tcap-tu-kui
    (near Santa Fé), he met Pu-u-kon-ho-ya (one of the mythic
    twins, grandsons of the Spider Woman) to whom he told his
    object. Pu-hu-kon-ho-ya said he could find those people, and
    fitting in his bow the arrow, fletched with wings of the
    bluebird, he shot it into the sky, and it came down far to
    the northeast, at Si-pa-pu, which people were climbing. The
    arrow told them its message; and they said, “We will travel
    to the southwest and may Tcá-ma-hia come to meet us.” On this
    the arrow flew back to its sender and told of these people and
    Tcá-ma-hia traveled westward to meet them. When he went to the
    great rock where Ácoma now is, he climbed up and found the
    great ladle-shaped Cavities on its summit, filled with rain
    water, and he named it the place of the ladle (A-ko-ky-obi).
    Here he rested and the people he was working for joined him
    there and at this place they have ever since remained.

Sand mosaics, or “dry-paintings,” made with elaborate care by skilled
artists of the tribe with sands of many colors, are so usual a part
of the ritual celebrations of Indian people that it has been no
little surprise and perplexity to find not a single allusion to such
altar-pictures at Ácoma. It is true that they are always within a _kiva_,
and since we have no description of any _kiva_ interior at Ácoma, the
conclusion can be only that sand mosaics are regarded as too sacred for
alien eyes to behold.[135]

To-day there is a colony of about five hundred Indians resident upon
the lofty peñol. The rich heritage of migration tradition, of folk-lore
concerning the adventures of their prehistoric ancestors, no less
than the more tangible evidence of a hardy and adventurous tribe
within the period of historic record, furnishes plenty of material for
the interested student. From the shadowy north by way of legendary
halting-places to Wukoki on the Little Colorado and so to the very
solid, glowing mass of Katzímo and on to Ácoma itself we have followed
their pilgrimage. Long labor would be sweet if only some one might gain
the coöperation of their own wise men to put within our grasp this
history of a vanishing culture.




Chapter XI

THE TRADITION OF KATZÍMO AND ÁCOMA

    Katzímo—a towering isolated mesa with vertical sides several
    hundred feet in height and utterly inaccessible. It is one of
    the most imposing cliffs in that portion of the Southwest and
    it is claimed by the Ácoma Indians that while the top of the
    mesa is to-day utterly beyond reach, it was accessible many
    centuries ago by an easy trail, and that their forefathers
    had built a pueblo on it after the manner of their present
    village.—BANDELIER.


Of all the features of the great lonely stretches of country that one
passes under the burning sky of the Southwest, most characteristic
are the mesas, those level-topped tables that rise abruptly from the
sandy plains, many-colored, and of irregular outline, catching the late
afternoon sunlight in such fashion as to bring into view mysterious
caverns that often were the early homes of cliff-dwellers. None, of all
the mesas, is more striking than Katzímo, rising isolated and abrupt four
hundred and thirty feet from a waste of sand. Here, says the long-revered
tradition of the Ácomas, their ancestors dwelt after their slow progress
from the north[136] until driven forth by disaster, whence comes the
appellation of the “Enchanted” Mesa, to build a final home upon the great
white rock where we find them to-day.

[Illustration: THE CLIFFS OF ÁCOMA

KATZÍMO IN DISTANCE; SMALL RESERVOIR ON RIGHT

_Bolton_]

The first impression of Katzímo as one approaches it by the sandy road
is of its extraordinary beauty of color. Buff blended with rose is
delicately veiled by the haze which almost everywhere softens severe
outlines in the desert, so that the gazer from afar finds one more reason
for its baptism of the Enchanted. Nearly circular in form, Katzímo seems
to be composed of sheer perpendicular walls fantastically pinnacled and
turreted, but on nearer scrutiny a sort of amphitheatre or cave hollowed
out by long erosion is found both on the northern and on the western
sides; yet so glassy are the walls that there is little encouragement to
attempt their conquest.

The legend of Katzímo relates that then as now the inhabitants were an
agricultural people, cultivating their crops in the plain below. Once,
in the timeless yesterday of their race when the season of planting had
arrived, the Sun Priest issued a proclamation that all the people must
descend the mesa to their fields.[137] There were left on the top only
three women, too ill for the work, and one boy to care for them. At night
he was directed to stand watch, lest the dreaded Apaches might raid
the pueblo in the absence of its warriors. A fearful storm of rain and
thunder such as had never been known made his task dangerous the second
night, but he stayed at his post till called by his mother, upon whom a
portion of her house had fallen. She told him to go down and bring back
some of the men to help.... The boy with infinite peril reached the plain
and started for the fields.

    Suddenly [says Lummis] he felt the ground quiver beneath his
    feet. A strange rushing sound filled his ears; and whirling
    about, he saw the great Ladder Rock rear, throw its head out
    from the cliff, reel there an instant in mid-air, and then
    go toppling out into the plain like some wounded Titan. As
    thousands of tons of rock smote upon the solid earth with a
    hideous roar, a great cloud went up, and the valley seemed to
    rock to and fro. From the face of the cliff three miles away,
    great rocks came leaping and thundering down, and the tall
    pines swayed and bowed as before a hurricane. A-chi-te was
    thrown headlong by the shock, and lay stunned. The Ladder Rock
    had fallen—the unprecedented flood had undermined its sandy
    bed.[138]

Thus are we led to think that some portentous convulsion of nature had
toppled off the pueblo, destroyed the ladder trail, and left the colony
homeless. No effort is recorded of any attempt to save the hapless
women, and the chapter is abruptly closed. It was apparently after this
terrible disaster that the mesa was called Katzímo, the “accursed” or
“enchanted,” and many is the spot that has earned such title for less
cause. How the mesa top looked before it was accursed we can never know,
but a few piñons and cedars on its top suggest the probability of its
having been sparsely wooded. This is a land of tempestuous thunder-storms
and heavy rains, when the water falls in cataracts over the mesa summit,
carrying fresh detritus to the heaps of talus below. Since this has been
going on for centuries, it is of course almost hopeless to find much
genuine record on the cliff itself of the origin and development of its
people. Nevertheless a few faint traces do exist, and because the legends
and the folk-lore of Katzímo and of Ácoma are so closely intertwined, we
cannot envisage the story of Ácoma without including Katzímo, however
slight the hope of disentangling solid fact from poetic legend.

We have good reason to believe that there are still shrines in the
recesses of Katzímo, and that in all probability there takes place either
in these clefts or on the summit periodic performance of rituals by the
Ácoma people. One clue to such use of the mesa is given by Miss McLain
of the Indian Service. She reported that an Indian family told her that,
when an Ácoma youth is being instructed in the _kiva_ into the mysteries
of the faith, the last step in his initiatory discipline before giving
him full freedom as a man, is to blindfold him and send him to the top
of the Mesa Encantada for a night’s lonely vigil, bearing a jar of water
as oblation to the spirits. It was explained to her that a boy could
climb blindfolded where he could not go open-eyed, “a fact all mountain
engineers will substantiate.”[139] There is also reason to think that
these novices as well as the worshippers at other ceremonies on Katzímo
have their own undivulged means of reaching the summit.

The desire to solve the mystery of Katzímo has impelled several students
of ethnology to scale its fearful cliffs and to gather whatever
fragmentary tales the Indians of the tribe can be induced to impart. Here
it may be well to note certain things that it is necessary to have in
mind when questioning an Indian. He is more likely to tell you the facts
or the legends of some other tribe than of his own, and even when he does
not exactly prevaricate, he is willing to embroider upon the truth in the
hope that he may mislead the foreign visitor, whose questions seem to him
an unwarranted intrusion upon his own particular preserves. Very little
from any source is to be learned of Katzímo. Bandelier, the distinguished
student of the history of the Southwest, has only this to say:

    It is certain that its appearance and the amount of detritus
    accumulated around its base give some color to the legend.
    Together with other tales it indicates that the Ácomas
    successively occupied several villages between San Mateo and
    their present location.

The men who have written the most about Ácoma and Katzímo are Bandelier,
Lummis, Hodge, and James. They all lived for considerable periods among
the Indians of this region, winning their friendship and confidence, so
that if any Indian traditions are trustworthy it would seem that this
must be so. But the fact is that the Ácomas are more secretive to-day,
probably, than any other Indian tribe.

Although the mesa is called inaccessible, Lummis made its ascent in 1883,
the earliest by a white man in our time. He published his account in
1885. A decade later (1895) Hodge, then of the Bureau of Ethnology in
Washington, attempted the ascent but was stopped sixty feet below the
actual top by a sheer wall of rock. He did, however, examine the talus,
piled high at the southwestern corner, and found many fragments of very
ancient pottery, which it is easy to distinguish from the modern ware
because decorated with a vitreous glaze, an art no longer practised by
the pueblo potters. Hodge also found unmistakable toe and finger holes in
the walls of the cliffs by which he climbed, which apparently justified
the tradition that it was up this part of the mesa that the ancient trail
had gone. A verbal account of the tradition was given Hodge at this time
by Tsiki, a chief and famous medicine man, of Ácoma.

In July, 1897, Professor William Libbey, of Princeton University, made
the ascent of the mesa with what he describes as almost superhuman
effort. He remained for two hours on the summit and was of the opinion
that there was “not the slightest indication that the top of the Mesa had
ever been the prehistoric home of the Ácomas or had ever been inhabited
at all,” since no bits of pottery or traces of construction of any sort
were visible. Consequently he named it “The Disenchanted Mesa.”[140]
Libbey admitted, however, that he made no exploration of the southwest
cove up which the ancient trail was reputed to have passed, nor of the
talus at its foot. As soon as Libbey published his account a new interest
was aroused in its history, and the Bureau of Ethnology requested Hodge,
who was at work in Arizona, to go to Katzímo and see what he could find.
Accordingly, in September of that year Hodge made his second ascent, and
since then George Wharton James has made further explorations. Setting
aside, then, the slight allusions of Bandelier and Libbey, let us look
at the experiences of the other three, who, on the whole, agree in their
deductions, though with some inevitable minor variations of detail.

James says very reasonably that, if the whole Katzímo tradition is
discredited, all Indian tradition is discredited and more obstacles added
to the unravelling of the obscurities of prehistoric Indian life. But he
also makes the good point that evidences of human presence and of human
occupation of any place are quite separate and diverse things.

[Illustration: THE ASCENT OF THE GREAT CLEFT OF KATZÍMO

1897

_Reprinted from the Century Magazine by permission of the Century Co._]

Hodge’s first experience had taught him that light extension ladders
and some half-inch rope would suffice to enable him to scale the sixty
feet of cliff which unaided he had been obliged to forego in 1895.
Accordingly, when he reached Laguna, he secured as companions a United
States surveyor of long residence in the region, Major G. H. Pradt, A.
C. Vroman, a well-known photographer of Pasadena, Mr. H. C. Hayt of
Chicago, and two Laguna Indian boys. They made their camp in some cedars
at the base of the cleft on the southwest, and while the ladder and other
equipment were got into position for the climb, Major Pradt determined
“that the elevation of the foot of the talus is 33 feet above the plain;
the apex of the talus 224 feet, and the top of the highest pinnacle on
the summit of the mesa overlooking the great cleft is 431 feet above the
same level.” [141]

Their climb, achieved with heroic effort and some danger, convinced
them that the toe and finger holes, without question originally chipped
out by human hands, had lost their first form by reason of the erosion
during the long lapse of years. Near the place where Hodge had been
stopped two years before was a great boulder in the corner of a terrace,
to which their ropes were now secured. Just below it ran a long crack
through the thirty-foot wall, and while resting on the boulder Hodge
suddenly saw four oak sticks about two and a half feet long and one
inch thick, pointed at both ends by some sharp tool. Soon afterward a
potsherd of modern make and an unfeathered prayer-stick were discovered,
and by digging in the sand the rest of the broken jar was found—evident
proof of some recent sacrificial offering. A few moments’ search on the
summit revealed a potsherd of very ancient type. A rude stone “monument”
was examined which Libbey had dismissed as being a natural phenomenon,
but which Hodge regards as indubitably a work of man. A slab thirty
inches long of vertical stratification is held erect by smaller slabs or
boulders of horizontal stratification—a variation that could hardly be
fantastic erosion.

Next morning the party was surprised by the appearance of three Ácoma
Indians, who had seen the fire built by the explorers for warmth on the
summit, and who were at first in no friendly mood. These men were two
_principales_ and a medicine man of their tribe. They had threatened the
Laguna Indians left in the camp below with cutting the ladder-rope and
compelling the descent of the invading white man. They were soon pacified
when told the visitors were only searching for curios and not prospecting
for territory. Luciano, the lieutenant-governor, said their “Ancients”
had once occupied the mesa, but that the destructive storms, to which
the region is subject, would prevent any relics of their time ever being
found. Then the ancient potsherd was produced and the Indians showed
excitement about it, as well as great “surprise” at the cairn, which they
did not explain. Whether or not their attitude might have come from a
desire to conceal their sacred treasures, Hodge does not intimate. At all
events, they helped in the search for more potsherds, and a number were
found in the scattered débris, as well as portions of a shell bracelet
and a blade-end of a white stone axe. This seemed important, as the upper
side was bleached by exposure, while the lower was soiled and damp.

After they had all descended the mesa, one of these Indians showed Hodge
another axe-blade notched similarly to the one they had found on top, and
admitted it had come from the ledge just below the summit and that he was
keeping it for ceremonial purposes. Thus the proofs of human occupation
of Katzímo seem well established, but whether permanent or only periodic
may perhaps never be known. In a personal letter to the writer in
February, 1922, Dr. J. W. Fewkes says:

    I have always had more or less doubt as to the use of the name
    Enchanted Mesa for Katzímo and was glad to see that you use the
    Indian word for it.... I have come to the conclusion that those
    who hold that the Pueblo once existed on its top have not made
    their point, archaeologically speaking. That they visited the
    top goes without saying, but to my mind the evidence is more
    mythical than scientific, that any considerable number lived on
    Katzímo in prehistoric times. The same story is also told by
    the Navajo of the settlement upon the top of Ship Rock and I
    believe is one of those legends which are not based wholly upon
    facts, or at any rate cannot be proven.




Chapter XII

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION

    That the present town-building tribes are the descendants of
    the ancient peoples is indicated by tradition, by skeletal
    evidence, and by material culture. The past connects with
    the present without perceptible break and the implements and
    utensils of to-day are, save for the intrusive elements of
    white civilization, those of the past.—W. H. HOLMES.

    The Southwest is more remarkable for its puzzles than for
    its positive data. The problems presented by its social
    organization are of supreme interest but our knowledge of the
    data is exceedingly imperfect.—GOLDENWEISER.


By reason of their geographic position, the pueblos were the natural
channel through which passed the culture from the south to more northern
areas. This culture, of whatever sort, they transmuted by their own
endowment into something distinctive and characteristic of themselves.
Kroeber puts it happily:

    Throughout, it was a flow of things of the mind, not a drift
    of the bodies of men: of culture, not of populations. The
    radiation was ever northward, counter to the drifts of the
    migrations which had begun thousands of years before and which,
    in part, seem to have continued to crowd southward even during
    the period of northward spread of civilization.[142]

If we must feel that the Southwest learned from Mexico “how to grow
and weave cotton, to irrigate, to build in stone, to obey priests,”
we are at the same time impressed by an intrinsic difference in its
development and practice from that of Mexico, as we see it in the Pueblo
civilization.

[Illustration: THE ILLIMITABLE DESERT

_Bolton_]

Each pueblo is a tribal unit formed of few or many clans, as the case may
be, always matrilinear in descent. Each is wholly independent of every
other and all have had a republican form of government from the earliest
times. Under very great stress of emergency, tribes have been known to
combine for a brief period, but ordinarily they crossed one another’s
path in peaceful times only for purposes of trade, or as Bandelier puts
it, “It may be said that no two tribes were ever so hostile as never to
trade, or so intimate as never to fight each other.” The designation
of titles and of official duties in these self-governing villages
varies more or less from tribe to tribe, but in essentials the recent
investigations of scholars incline them to believe in a fundamental
similarity.

There has been much discussion as to the priority of clan or of kinship
in the up-building of the economic fabric of pueblo society. The position
of Kroeber seems the most simple and natural. He contends that clan
functions are too vague and remote to allow them precedence over the
normal and inherent relations of every created being. Quoting him: “To
blood ties they are blindly loyal and instinctively affectionate. Outside
all are but associates.” If further intercourse cements esteem, any
one, of whatever race, “even a Navajo,” may be held more dear and less
hostile than one of their own tribe. Again Kroeber says,

    What is clear is, that there is in the Pueblo mind and has been
    for centuries past, a concept of a definite and characteristic
    scheme of clan organization which belongs to no one nation but
    is common to all. The whole nature of the existing clans in the
    Southwest is that of an organ in a body.[143]

One remarkable and characteristic feature that prevails in the clan
system is the grouping of clans in pairs. It is very prominent in Hopi,
and though not directly established for Keresan Pueblos, it appears
probable because the same pairs frequently occur in that nation.

Kroeber differentiates the family and clan as follows. The clan is a
ceremonial institution, whereas the family is the foundation of society
and is centred in the house as a basic concept. The house belongs to
the women of the family, not merely as they are living to-day, but from
the long past in successive generations. “There they have come into
the world, pass their lives, and within its walls they die.” True, the
clan is maternal and totemically named, and also the same terms of
relationship are applied to its members as to those of blood kindred.
While this is an undoubted source of confusion to strangers and to the
student of its culture, there never is the slightest ambiguity in the
native mind between the two.

    Clans give color, variety, and interest to the life of the
    tribe, [but are] not thought of in ordinary personal relations.
    They are only an ornamental excrescence upon society, whose
    warp is the family of actual blood relations and whose woof is
    the house.... House-life, house-ownership, economic status,
    matrilinear reckoning, clan-organization and functions, the
    type of marriage and divorce, are all in direct conflict with
    both theory and practice of corresponding Spanish, Mexican,
    English and Catholic institutions, and yet maintain themselves
    to-day,

from which he concludes that European contact had no important influence
upon Zuñi kinship, or, by inference, upon any other Pueblo community.

The children belong to the mother’s clan, and marriage within that
clan is forbidden. Though permitted within the clan of the father, it
is disapproved. A reason for this as given to Dr. Parsons was that
the children born of such union are never as strong as when diverse
clans are mingled. The family organization among all Pueblos tends
toward a compound type, consisting of as many as three generations. The
young children are much in the care of the old people, especially of
grandparents, by which division of labor the parents are released for
their active toil in the fields or at their crafts. One sees in such a
village as Ácoma quite little girls carrying far too heavy babies in a
blanket on their backs, but one is told that there the men frequently
carry the little children, which is not a usual pueblo custom.

There are no terms in Keresan for son or daughter, the words child, boy,
girl, being used instead. Ácoma distinguishes according to sex but not
according to age in expressing relationships between brother and sister.
There is no specific terminology for relatives by marriage, but such
exists for “cross-cousins,” that is, the children of a blood brother and
sister. Dr. Parsons says that “Ácoma kinship terms correspond closely to
Laguna,” but that brother-and-sister terms are applied in Ácoma to all
cousins, which is not the common usage, though it is done at Zuñi. She
has compiled elaborate tables for kin- and clanship at Laguna, in which
Ácoma is frequently alluded to, and has included one long table of Ácoma
terms.[144] Kroeber likewise gives a table of Ácoma-Laguna kinship-terms,
compiled by himself, some of which he considers “not only not European,
but far more extreme than Zuñi,” although the “generic resemblance of
Keres to Hano and Zuñi is preserved.”

The next important question is the relation of the clan to the
fraternities. Kroeber says that the one is social, and the other
religious. Certain fraternities are widely distributed, and he has
established for Zuñi, as Mrs. Stevenson did for Sía, that membership is
voluntary, not clan-controlled, but follows blood or marriage connection.
It is apparently true that in “certain cases succession to office in
fraternities does depend on clanship.”[145] This is rather different from
the situation in the Hopi pueblos, where the fraternities are at least
definitely associated in the native mind with the clans of the same name.
The function of the fraternities consists mainly in medicine-giving and
in jugglery; though they take part in some of the communal ceremonies,
they have no masked representations of deities, nor do they exercise
their powers primarily for the bringing of rain. They have no right to
the _kivas_, their meeting-place being in the front rooms of houses; they
have official heads, but no priests.

At Sía and presumably at Ácoma, the Koshare and the Cuiranná form one
fraternity whose duty it is to guide and attend the K’at’sina in their
masked dances. At Zuñi the clan is then a body of

    mildly social type, with prevailing if not important
    ritualistic functions,—those being exercised by individuals
    in virtue of their clan-membership, and never by the clan
    as a body.... Clans, fraternities, priesthoods, _kivas_,
    gaming-parties, are all dividing agencies, but by countering
    each other they cause segmentations which produce marvellous
    complexity, but never break national entity apart.[146]

Certain other complexities of strain have arisen through the coming in to
the pueblo of women from other nations. One Zuñi governor married a woman
from the Cherokee Wolf clan, and as a matter of course she was received
into their Coyote clan. In two or three generations it will be forgotten
that her descendants were ever anything but Zuñi. Our author admits that
the social fabric of Zuñi may be more closely knit than some others, but
is of the opinion that all Southwestern tribes are so intimate that what
is true of one may be predicated of the rest.

At bottom, all Pueblo government is theocratic. Civil officers are chosen
and may be deposed by certain priesthoods which are clan-associated.
However great the divergence of opinion during the choice of candidates,
no decision may be announced until a complete unanimity is agreed
upon. The civil government is chiefly concerned with property, and
equities in material things, individual or communal. The governor and
lieutenant-governor must be of different clans, and, theoretically at any
rate, so also are their aids. Certain officials serve only one year at a
time, and as there is a general disposition to give equal representation
in public affairs to each clan, such diffusion of power tends toward a
community thoroughly welded together.

According to Kroeber,

    The source of all Zuñi authority, sacred or profane [and of
    all other Pueblos as well?] lies in certain priesthoods, and
    since these receive their origin, venerability, permanence,
    and even name from the _ettowe_ (fetishes) with which they are
    associated, the depth to which these fetishes underlie all Zuñi
    life becomes apparent.

The fetishes are preserved in certain houses and are normally kept
in jars of special design, fed at appointed times, but handled and
exposed only on occasions of extreme ritualistic importance. The true
understanding of Zuñi life other than its purely practical operations
can be had only as we centre it about the _ettowe_.

When a family abandons a house, the room where the _ettowe_ usually lies
is kept in repair, and its priests continue to go in _watto_ (to pray)
there.[147] Each clan possesses its _ettowe_, and probably each set of
priests is more or less clan-associated.

    Around these priesthoods, fraternities, clan-organization, as
    well as most esoteric thinking and sacred tradition, group
    themselves, while in turn _kivas_, dances, and acts of public
    worship can be construed as but the outward means of expression
    of inward activities that radiate around the nucleus of the
    physical fetishes and the ideas attached to them.[148]

The visitor to any particular pueblo, if forearmed with some such general
ideas of its policy, will assuredly gain a little better understanding
of even the superficial occupations that he may chance to observe. We
were consequently keen to learn how many of the old customs survive in
this conservative community of Ácoma. It was not difficult to realize
the deeply intimate family relationship of three generations of women of
the Eagle clan with whom we associated. We also visited a more modern
house of the Sun clan and we got some confirmatory impressions of many of
the civil functions of its male population. In Ácoma, then, as in most
Pueblo settlements, the family life is a mutually supporting partnership.
Everything within the house belongs to the woman, even if brought there
by her husband. Although the man goes forth to the hunt, once he has laid
within the threshold a rabbit or a deer, he may not thereafter touch it
if his wife objects, and all domestic animals, like sheep and chickens,
belong to her and may not be sold without her permission. However, the
man has his own prerogatives. To the man belong his blankets and his
weapons, his horses and burros, his farm implements and all other tools.
The right to hold office in the pueblo, to attain to priesthood in the
fraternities, and to frequent the _kivas_ (ceremonial chambers) are
alone open to the men. From this fact it is evident that in spite of
this semblance of a matriarchate the women have no voice in government.
Further, it is true that so long as a man is a legitimate member of a
household he is ruler of its affairs. The curious anomaly is seen (at
Zuñi) in the contrasting fact that if a man divorces his wife even for
the most flagrant immorality, it is he who leaves the house to her use,
though, as sometimes happens, he has rebuilt it, and he does this without
the faintest feeling of any injustice done to himself.

The Ácomas use the Catholic form of sponsorship at marriage, and no
divorce is permitted. The parents of either one of the bridal pair
choose a man and his wife to be the “best man” and “best woman,” and
these two take the couple directly home from the ceremony to their house,
wash their heads, and give them advice. The man speaks first and gives
a present to the groom; then his wife does likewise with the bride. The
bridegroom also gives his bride a present, perhaps a dress.

Although at Ácoma divorce is said to be unknown, it is very likely that
here, as in most pueblos, the simple device of putting beyond the doorway
all the man’s personal belongings is all the information he needs that
his wife no longer wishes him to live with her. Similarly, if a man
throws his blanket over his shoulder in a certain way and departs, his
wife is notified of his intention to separate from her.

A definite idea was certainly given us at Ácoma in 1922 that the
government there is fundamentally theocratic. I am, however, indebted to
Dr. Parsons for the details of its organization as she understood it in
1918.

The officials of Ácoma are a cacique (_ti-á-moni_, arch-ruler), a
governor with purely administrative functions, two lieutenant-governors
(_tenientes_), three war chiefs (_tsatichucha_), and their two cooks
(_cocineros_). There are besides, ten _principales_, who, like the
cacique, are chosen for life, whereas all other officials serve but one
year at a time.

A chief duty of the cacique[149] is to act as penitent for the sins of
his tribe; and when he goes out into the wilderness by untrodden paths to
fast for an uncertain length of days, the whole pueblo is in solemn mood,
and the chance visitor is not made welcome.[150] Contrary to the custom
in most pueblos, at Ácoma the cacique has no subordinates; neither does
he have to be a _cheani_ (medicine man) himself, although he is always
appointed by the _cheani_. The true character of the cacique’s position
has never been clearly defined for us, since he will not reveal the
secrets of his office to anyone, unless to the man he looks upon as his
successor. Although his title is that of “Arch-ruler,” he is evidently
not all-powerful, for the war captain (_hócheni_)[151] is his warden,
with power to punish him if he becomes arrogant or remiss in his duties.

Upon every important occasion the cacique must fast, either having only
one meagre meal in a day, or sometimes none for four days; consequently
the office is not a very popular honor. It demands a long, severe
tutelage in physical endurance as well as in the deeper mysteries of the
esoteric orders. During all fasts and ceremonies, unbroken continence is
exacted, for the cacique is Watcher of the Sun. Moreover, he has to help
the war captains to look after the _Katsina_, or masked impersonators of
the gods which “function for rain, crops, animals, and the sick.” In
times of war he is both surgeon and nurse for the wounded. Nevertheless
the cacique has certain perquisites; for, although the people do not
plant for him they do bring in to him his harvests. Also, each year they
hold four rabbit hunts for him, one in each of the cardinal directions.
This hunt comes “after the war chiefs say they have been fasting for four
days and it is time to have a hunt.” A little later comes a general hunt
in which women may join.[152]

The ten _principales_, who are always of the Antelope clan, and who enjoy
a life tenure, seem to act as a higher court. They may be quite young,
and they instruct the cacique if he is old, as to what is going on,
and what he must do. The _principales_ control the land distributions,
agricultural land being allotted to individuals and grazing fields being
held in common.

“The war chiefs[153] have undoubtedly sacerdotal as well as military
functions. They are said to pray morning and night and at ceremonials
for the people, for their animals, for crops and for rain.” But of these
rites Dr. Parsons[154] learned nothing definite. The present writer saw
three of the war chiefs going forth about six in the morning, gorgeously
blanketed and bedecked with many and various pendant ornaments, but too
far away to be distinguished.

Bandelier[155] says that the war captain occupies among the Keres a
position of peculiar distinction. He is the military leader and sheriff.
His supremacy over both governor and cacique arises from an old belief
that he is representative of Ma-se-ua, one of the two sons of the Sun
Father and Moon Mother. The other son, Oyo-ya-ya, is represented by the
war captain’s lieutenant, who bears his name.

These two brothers, equivalent no doubt to the Twins in Zuñi myths,
are held in almost greater reverence than the sun and moon, and one of
the chief public dances of the Keres is given in their honor, whereas
formerly it was addressed to the sun.

Although different informants gave Dr. Parsons no clear statement as to
whether or not there is definite ranking of the clans, she concluded that
it is the Antelope clan (_Kuüts Hanoch_) that governs, and that it has
undoubtedly ceremonial prerogatives.[156] Its members choose the _Kasik_,
who is the spiritual, and nominally the temporal, head of the pueblo, and
is almost invariably a man distinguished for uprightness and wisdom.

On the first of the two brief visits made to Ácoma in the summer of
1922, I was told by a man who spoke English readily that the cacique is
“always Antelope,” and that, though his duties are chiefly sacerdotal,
it is he who names the officers for the ensuing year at the election in
December. On the second visit the same informant referred for the first
time to the cacique as his “uncle,” adding, “He is very old and nearly
blind.” There was no question that the man with most authority in 1922
was the _hócheni_ or war captain, a situation due very possibly to the
physical disability of the cacique.

The annual election of officers forms an important part of the winter
solstice ceremonies. After a week of commingled pagan and Christian
festivities, the installation takes place either on December 30 or
January 1, which is known as “King Day.” To inform the pueblo when and
where this function will take place, the town crier (_kahera_) makes
the circuit of the several roadways (as is the custom at Ácoma) calling
out his instructions. When the men have assembled in the long-house
(_Komanira_) near the church, the nominations made by the cacique are
announced by the outgoing war chiefs; after this a general vote is
taken, though a pure formality, for even if a nominee demurs he cannot
help himself. We are told of cases when men ran away to avoid office,
but were forced to return and serve as chosen. In installing officers,
says Dr. Parsons, those going out “kneel on both knees, make the sign
of the Cross, say the prayer beginning, ‘Padre santo-spirito. Amen,’
and pass the cane of office to their successors. All present kneel, of
course removing their hats. Bandas are not removed.”[157] The election
festivities continue through January 10, dances being performed in
different houses in honor of the newly elected officers. The governor
told Dr. Parsons that the people would stay on for ten days or so: “They
have to, we have not given them the rules yet,” he said.[158]

One writer[159] describes a ceremony at Ácoma that I have found mentioned
nowhere else. He witnessed it on a spring morning in 1864. He describes
the “single steep, narrow, winding path” from the plain to the top of the
mesa, which “near the top narrows and is flanked on each side by a tall
much-worn pillar of the sandstone-rock formation of the mesa, requiring
no very vivid imagination to portray them as sentinels keeping watch over
the approaches to this citadel.” A dance of purification for a recent
victory over the Navajos was to be celebrated that day. The visitors
noticed that one of these two stone pillars “appeared to be an object
of especial regard; ribbons were hung on it; heads of corn and pieces
of cake were flung up with an effort to lodge them on its flattened or
concave summit.” The Alcalde of the pueblo joined the Americans and told
the story of the pillar, in substance as follows:

Many long years ago the peace of the Indian country was threatened by
a great force of Spaniards coming from Mexico. Warning was given by
runners from pueblo to pueblo in order that a concerted resistance might
be made to stop the “ruin and desolation that marked the Spaniard’s path
in this cruel warfare. Soon these warnings ceased.” But because there
was plenty of evidence that the invaders were still despoiling the land,
the young men of Ácoma agreed among themselves to keep a vigilant watch
from the summits of one of these stone pillars. Many days passed and
all was quiet. The pillar top was well stocked with provisions for the
watcher. And then one night, after rain and wind had made the darkness
unwontedly thick, he was startled as the dawn came, to see the Spaniards
actually scaling the steep. They were, in fact, so close that he could
not leave his post to give the alarm. All he could do was to blow his
“loud-sounding horn-note of imminent danger to his friends” and try as
best he could to keep the enemy at bay for the few precious moments
before help could reach him. He was well equipped “with bow and arrows,
shield and spear. Without descending from his post, the narrow path,
whose width only admitted of one person passing at a time, was soon
blocked with the disabled foe.” Wounded, the sentinel hero fell back on
his lofty perch, but not till the village men had hurried to his aid, and
these, fresh and strong, were more than a match for those Spaniards who
gained the top of the cliff. A short, impetuous fight brought victory
to the Ácomas, and the long dread was vanquished, but the hero of the
pillar was dead at his post. “And for this,” said the Alcalde, “we every
year have our rejoicings near the foot of the pillar and by our joy and
praises thank the spirit of the hero who so bravely sacrificed himself to
save his people.”

This story was confirmed during my second visit to the mesa. Although we
saw no such weather-worn pillars on the summit of Ácoma, I hazard the
guess that they may have stood at the top of the so-called “Runners,”
or “Deadman’s trail,” which our informant told me had been out of use
for many years but which once had served to preserve the pueblo from
the Spaniards. At that time I thought he was trying to persuade me
that the Ácomas won the famous fight of Zaldívar, but he probably knew
the tradition of this other invasion by the Spaniards, for he was very
positive in his statement that the white men were all killed or driven
off in a fierce encounter at that point, and that the second name was
given to that particular trail because of this event.

Another noteworthy remark of Gwyther’s is that the Ácomas were somewhat
surly until they found that the visitors were all Americans; it was only
toward Mexicans that they cherished any ill-will, and thereafter the
visitors were treated with entire cordiality.

Who will go to Ácoma and become by slow degrees a familiar and trusted
dweller among the people, even as Cushing did at Zuñi? That person alone,
I am convinced, talking their language, eating their food, observing
quietly their customs, will avail to penetrate the heart of the Ácoma
secret.




Chapter XIII

FOLK-TALES OF ÁCOMA

    What does the name imply? The ‘lore of the Folk.’ But the
    ‘folk’ are the backward people among ourselves, and from their
    unwritten sagas and stories, their customs and beliefs, we find
    an unmistakable record of the clash of opposing races, but of a
    time long antecedent to history.—ALFRED CORT HADDON.


Three types of the survivals of inherited traditions regarding the
supernatural, and its relation to human beings, are the religious
beliefs, the great myths, and the folk-tales, which may be regarded as
myths in their infancy. Folk-tales are the happenings of more recent
times than those that are concerned with the origin of the race and the
heroic demi-gods.

Story-telling by the old men of any semi-civilized society is the pastime
of their leisure hours, and is all the literature of the tribe. With the
American Indian there were songs and tales for every adventure in their
tribal history. Imagination is so vital an element of all that the Indian
believes, entering into all he says and does in daily life, that it must
never be out of mind in any study of his culture.

All unexplained phenomena belong to the world of necromancy, and every
Indian language has its own name for this magic power residing in such
phenomena. Throughout the Indian world the song of birds is deemed a
magic spell. When, therefore, human beings sing, they too are weaving
magic, over the grinding, over the planting, over the painting of jars,
to bring the favor of those above upon that especial occupation. Hence,
singing is a universal accompaniment of Indian life and Indian worship.

In the book of Indian music by Natalie Curtis Burlin[160] there are
three songs given from Ácoma, belonging to the Corn-people, _Gátsina_
(K’at’sina), those mythological beings impersonated by masked dancers
in the ceremonials. Only two words appear in these songs, _shiwanna_,
meaning cloud, and _hawilana_, meaning growing corn. For the remainder,
vocables only are used. It is further stated that these songs are sung in
other villages, such as Laguna and Zuñi, and therefore they may not be
distinctively native to Ácoma. In folk-tales, just as in the myths, we
are warned against too much reliance upon explanatory significances. A
single tale may involve ten or a dozen interpretations. Waterman points
out that a most interesting fact in American folk-lore is the enormous
distance, sometimes thousands of miles, to which a tale can travel
from what it is fair to consider as its original home. Naturally the
explanation will vary with local conditions, for primitive man is even
more interested in and occupied by his immediate environment than are
we of a later age, and we are by no means emancipated from that limited
outlook upon the world about us.

Waterman says very happily that

    if any one fact becomes clear from an acquaintance with
    Indian society, it is this, that the satisfaction which
    Indian audiences get out of the recital of a tale is not an
    intellectual but an emotional one. He genuinely loves to listen
    to a good story. The absorbing interest which primitive people
    take in stories as stories is one of the picturesque features
    of primitive life.... Explanations are decidedly less important
    than the novelistic elements of the plot.[161]

Ácoma on its craggy height, haughtily indifferent or inimical to its
neighbors, has imparted little of itself to outsiders even in the way of
folk-lore or of music. Espinosa considers that the “Pueblo Indians have
given very little to the great traditional treasure of Spanish folk-lore
of New Mexico.... But some of them have absorbed a considerable amount
of Spanish folk-lore material.” He contributes two tales and about fifty
short anecdotes or fables, collected at the farm colony of Acomita by one
of his students, all of which show European ancestry.

I wish here to express my thanks to Mrs. N. V. Sanchez for her
translation of the following selection from this group of tales. That
called “San Pascual” is apparently a satire upon the Christian ritual. To
the ignorant lad the figure of the Lord on the cross means only that he
must be a criminal; when later He creates a feast from nothing tangible
it could only be through sorcery. The Indian everywhere attributed
diseases that followed the coming of the Spaniards to their sprinkling of
the neophytes with holy water. Only with these three things in mind does
the story of San Pascual become intelligible.

The same student collected fifty fables, from which I have chosen four,
one of which bears a certain likeness to that of Æsop called “The Fox and
the Crow.”[162]

Two stories given below were told to Dr. Parsons by the cacique of Ácoma
and written down by her in English. In one of these, for the first time
we gain faint hints of a tradition of an earlier settlement at the foot
of the rock which, if confirmed, would seem to ally the movements of
this Keresan tribe more closely to those of other mesa pueblos than has
heretofore been evident.

The brief form of “Borrowed Feathers” is added because of its allusion to
Katzímo, and also because there is little question that in it we have a
tale of purely Indian origin.

One significant allusion to Ácoma may be read in a volume of tales
collected by Cushing at Zuñi.[163] In the one called “The Maiden and
the Sun,” an Ácoma spectator takes part at a Zuñi festival, and runs
away with the body of the maiden’s mother. Later the scene moves to
Ácoma itself in an attempt to get from the dance-priestess there the
magic-working bones of the deceased woman. Here we have a striking proof
of certain inter-relationships of tradition and of custom between Ácoma
and Zuñi, about which ordinarily we hear emphatic denial rather than
confirmation.


BORROWED FEATHERS: DON’T LOOK UP: BACK TO LIFE

Informant, cacique (_hócheni_) of Ácoma, about 75 years of age

    Long ago at Hanishoku[164] the pigeons (_houk_) were flying
    about. They gave Coyote some of their feathers to fly with.
    Coyote (_chuski_) was heavy and lagged behind. The pigeons
    said, “Let us fly up to the water-hole on top of the mesa! Let
    us fly on ahead of Coyote. He has a dirty mouth.” They flew on
    to the water-hole, Coyote after them. When they had finished
    drinking, they took their feathers away from Coyote and left
    him there crying. As he was crying, the spider below heard him.
    Spider said, “Somebody is crying.” Spider went up, and saw that
    it was Coyote. Coyote said, “Will you take me down?” Spider
    said, “Yes. Wait here until I get my basket. I will lower you
    down in it.” Spider went down and got his basket. He said to
    Coyote, “Get in, but as you descend do not look up. If you look
    up, I shall drop you.” When the basket was half way down Coyote
    began to say to himself, “I wonder why Spider does not want me
    to look up!” Then he looked up. Spider let go of the basket,
    and Coyote dashed down into pieces.

    Another coyote passed by, and saw the pieces. “I wonder who
    died here!” said he. “I had better see.” He gathered together
    the bones, and covered them over with a cloth. On the north
    side he began to sing,

          “Tsaiu tsaiu akuhato
        Nia ako nia ako.”

    On the west side he sang,

          “Tsaiu tsaiu akuhato
        Nia ako nia ako.”

    On the south side he sang,

          “Tsaiu tsaiu akuhato
        Nia ako nia ako.”

    On the east side he sang,

          “Tsaiu tsaiu akuhato
        Nia ako nia ako.”

    The coyote said, “I wish to see who is underneath. Arise!”
    Out came Coyote. “Is it you?” “Yes.” “Who killed you?” “I was
    on top of the mesa, and Spider threw me down.” “Where do you
    live?” “I live far over on the south side.” “Well, go home.”
    That is all (_tomesau_).—Pp. 220, 221.


FORGETTING THE SONG: INSIDE THE LIZARD

Informant, cacique of Ácoma

    A long time ago (_tsikinomaha_) at Kaiaushitsa there was a
    lizard (?) (_tapinosk_) singing. He sang,

          “Heto uma tima
        matiu ti mu.”

    There came up a coyote (_chuski_) and listened. Lizard sang
    again,

          “Heto uma tima
        matiu ti mu.”

    Coyote said, “I think it was over there to the west.” He came
    closer. He said, “Friend (_saukin_), are you here?” Lizard
    said, “Yes.” Coyote said, “You have fine sound. I want you to
    sing for me. I want to learn it.” Lizard said, “Very well.” He
    sang,

          “Heto uma tima
        matiu ti mu.”

    “Did you learn it, my sound?” asked Lizard. “Yes.” “Sing it.”
    Coyote sang (in a lower key and ponderously),

          “Heto uma tima
        matiu ti mu.”

    “I see you have learned my sound,” said Lizard. Coyote said, “I
    am going.” He went to the east. As he approached a cedar tree,
    singing his song, a rabbit sitting under the tree heard him.
    The rabbit jumped up and ran into a prairie-dog hole. Coyote
    ran after the rabbit, and began to dig in the hole. He dug,
    dug, dug, until his nails were worn off. Then he tried to sing
    his song, and could only say, “Mati, mati.” The rest he had
    forgotten. He said, “I had better go back and ask my friend.”
    He went back to Lizard, and said, “Friend, sing for me.” Lizard
    only looked at him, saying nothing. “Friend, sing your song
    for me. I am going to ask you four times. Then, if you don’t
    sing, I shall swallow you down. Now, sing for me.” Lizard said
    nothing. “Sing for me.” Lizard said nothing. “Sing for me.”
    Lizard said nothing. Then he swallowed him down. Inside of
    Coyote, Lizard sang,

          “Heto uma tiuma
        matiu ti mu.”

    Coyote said, “Where are you?” “I am inside.” “Very well,
    friend; but don’t cut my throat or my stomach. Just sing.” But
    Lizard did cut his throat and his stomach, and Coyote fell down
    dead.[165]


BORROWED FEATHERS

Informant, Getsitsa of Laguna, about 60 years of age

    Long ago (_hamaha_), the bluebirds (?) (_kaihadanish_) were
    grinding. Coyote (_chuski_) began to grind too. The bluebirds
    said, “Let us all go get a drink on top of Katzímo! But
    what shall we do with our friend (_saukin_) here? He has no
    feathers. We must give him some of our feathers.” So they gave
    him of their feathers. They flew to the top of the mesa. They
    drank. Then they said, “Let us take back our feathers! Let us
    leave Coyote here!” They took all their feathers away from him.
    He roamed about looking for a way down. He began to jump. It
    was steep. He fell and killed himself. The bluebirds wondered
    what had become of him.[166]


THE SERPENT, THE MAN, THE OX, THE HORSE, AND THE COYOTE (From
Acomita)[167]

    Once a man, while going through a meadow, found a serpent
    trapped under a stone. The man had compassion for it and took
    away the stone.

    At that time the animals spoke the same as we, and the serpent
    said to the man: “Now I am going to eat you: I am very hungry.”
    “Why do you wish to eat me after I did you such a great
    benefit?” But the serpent insisted on eating him and at last
    the man said to him: “Wait a little while. Wait until that ox
    gets here and then you may eat me.” “Good,” the serpent replied.

    And as soon as the ox arrived the man said to him: “Where has
    it been seen that a good deed is repaid with evil?” “In me,”
    replied the ox. “After I served my master for many years he
    unkindly turned me out here to get fat so that he can kill me.”
    And then the serpent said to the man: “So you see it is right
    that I should eat you.”

    “Wait a little until that old horse comes, and then you may eat
    me,” the man said to him. Good; so they waited, and as soon as
    he came the man said to him, “Where has it been seen that a
    good deed is repaid with an evil one?” “In me,” said the horse,
    “for after serving my master for many years they left me here
    for the wild beasts to eat me.” “Now you see how right it is
    that I should eat you,” the serpent said to the man. “Wait a
    bit until that coyote comes and then you may eat me.”

    Good; so the coyote came and the man said to him: “Where has it
    been seen that good is repaid by evil? This serpent was trapped
    under a stone, and because I did him the benefit of taking away
    the stone he now wishes to eat me.” “It is quite right that he
    should eat you,” said the coyote, “but first I wish to see how
    the serpent was trapped.”

    The serpent then consented that they should roll back the stone
    so that they might see how he was trapped. And as soon as he
    was well trapped, the coyote said: “Was it like this that
    he was trapped?” “Yes, it was like this,” they all replied.
    “Good,” the coyote said to them, “if that is the way it was,
    let him remain so, so that the devil may not cause him to eat
    me also.”


SAN PASCUAL

    A poor man who lived in a city had no family but his
    disconsolate wife.

    In the course of time they had a little child. And as they
    were so poor there was no one they could ask to be godfathers.
    Near the city lived a rich man who had many sheep, and they
    determined to ask this rich man to be the godfather.

    The rich man consented with much pleasure, and they took the
    child to the chapel of the same city and baptized him. They
    named him “Pascual the destitute.”

    Not long afterwards, in three months, death came and carried
    away the mother of the child, and the father then decided to
    go and deliver the orphan to the godfather. And as at the same
    time the farm foreman arrived with his party, the godfather
    gave the child to him and said: “See here, man, take this child
    with you, so that you may rear him with a goat, in order that
    he may be of some service to you when he is a man.”

    Good; so they took him to the steward and told him what his
    name was and that the patron had said that they were to rear
    him. And then they took him.

    The steward was a very religious man and whenever he could he
    went to divine services, but he never took the child.

    When Pascual was ten years old and was now very useful, the
    steward ordered the farm foreman to go to the house of the
    patron, for he did not need him any longer.[168]

    One day the steward went to mass, and left Pascual alone
    taking care of the cattle. Pascual began to think, and said to
    himself: “But what can mass be?” Finally he decided that if he
    left him alone again he would follow him to find out what mass
    was.

    He did so. The steward went away and Pascual followed him. When
    he lacked only a mile to arrive in the city he saw a man coming
    in a cart for wood. As the poor little fellow had never seen
    carts, he said, “Now I know what mass is. This is it.”

    As soon as the woodman came up he said to him, “May God give
    you good days, kind sir.” “Good days to you, good boy.” Then
    Pascual asked him: “Where is mass?” Said the woodman, “Go
    straight along this road until you come to the plaza, there
    where it is seen to _coloriar_, and the great house which is in
    the little square in the middle is the church, and inside of it
    they say mass.”

    “And what does one do in mass?” asked Pascual. “Everything that
    you see done, you do,” the woodman told him.

    Good; he then went straight to the plaza and soon found the
    chapel. Outside was an old woman, and he took her shawl from
    her and covered himself. And he took off his breeches and
    covered them up. Then he entered the church. And when they all
    prostrated themselves they saw him without breeches, and some
    of the mischievous ones pricked him behind. And then Pascual
    pricked the old woman, who was in front of him, saying: “Prick,
    prick, for they are pricking behind.”[169]

    When everybody went out he remained alone, much frightened, and
    when he saw the Lord nailed on a timber he said, “This poor man
    killed or robbed.” The sacristan did not see him and locked all
    the doors, leaving him shut in.

    Then Pascual went to where the Lord was and said to him:
    “Friend, do not be sad. I am going to work and I will bring you
    food to fatten you. Where can I find work?” “Look,” said the
    Lord, “go along the main street until you find a great house.
    Ask for work there.”

    The door opened and Pascual went out and came to the great
    house, which was where the curate lived, and the sacristan came
    out and asked him what he wanted. “I am looking for work.”
    The curate then came out and said to him: “What kind of work
    do you want?” “I do not know how to do anything but take care
    of sheep,” replied Pascual. “Then come here. How much pay do
    you want?” “Nothing but food for myself and a friend of mine.”
    “Good, then take this hoe and weed the garden.” “How weed?”
    “Level it all,” said the curate.

    And Pascual weeded the garden, leveling it all, chili, onions,
    and everything, he cut down level. The sacristan saw the
    destruction and went to tell the curate. But when the curate
    came he saw that all the pulled-up plants were flowering and
    giving fruit. And the curate said to him: “Surely this is a
    servant of God, who comes to test my gratitude.”

    And he called Pascual to come and eat with him. “No, I only
    want food for myself and for my friend.” They gave it to him
    and he went away. When he returned the curate said to him:
    “To-morrow I am going to make a great feast, and I wish you and
    your friend to come and eat at my table.” They went, and the
    curate made a very great feast.

    And the Lord said to Pascual: “Tell the father to invite
    to-morrow all the people to a feast except your godfather,
    because he was ungrateful.”

    The next day the gentleman made the feast, and when the people
    were coming Pascual was much ashamed because he saw that
    nothing was ready, and he said to the Lord: “But, men, nothing
    is ready. That is why they have you a prisoner, because you are
    a deceiver.” “Go bring a barrel of water,” the Lord said to
    him. “And where shall I go to bring water?” “Go, Pascual, on
    one side of the street and you will find it.” And Pascual went
    out and returned with a barrel of water.

    When he returned there was a large table well set out and full
    of all kinds of viands. And Pascual said to the Lord: “With
    reason they regard you as a witch.” “Be silent, Pascual; take
    this barrel and follow me.” And Pascual followed him, and when
    he turned around he saw dead persons lying on all sides, and he
    said to the Lord: “With reason they held you prisoner, for you
    are a regular murderer.” “Be silent, Pascual; follow me.” And
    they went on, scattering water on all sides until everybody was
    dead.

    And when Pascual died he was raised to the celestial mansions.
    And his godfather went to the eternal abyss for his ingratitude.

        If it is true
        He is over there;
        If it is a lie
        Then he is fooled.


SHORT FOLK-TALES AND ANECDOTES

(From Acomita)

    22. A man who was very poor and had a very large family was
    once talking with his children, and he said to them: “When I
    have money I am going to build a house with balustrades.” One
    of his sons came to him and said: “I am going to climb on the
    balustrade.” Another said: “And I also.” And still another
    said: “And I am going to sit on the balustrade.” The man became
    angry and told them: “This disorderly family will wear out the
    balustrade.” And he gave them all a good beating.

    27. A man was riding horseback one day. It was raining, and he
    wished to smoke his pipe. He had no matches, so he waited till
    there was a lightning flash, when he put spurs to his horse and
    went to light his pipe by the light of the flash.

    29. A little coyote was going along with a chicken in his
    mouth, and on the way the chicken said to him: “Why don’t you
    say ‘cheese’?” And the coyote said ‘cheese’ and away goes the
    chicken to the top of a tree. “Come down,” said the coyote to
    her. “A command has come for all the animals to assemble.”
    “Good,” said the chicken. “There are some hounds coming now.”
    “That is not in the command,” said the coyote, and ran off.

    36. They say that a Mexican of Alameda went to Albuquerque to
    sell eggs. The American of the store said to him: “Sit down.”
    “No sir, they are not to be given away (_no se dan_), they are
    for sale,”[170] he said to this. Then the American, who did not
    understand him, said: “Are you crazy?” And he replied: “No sir,
    they do not grow, the hens lay them.”[171]

    30. _Un pastor le diju al cura que quería pagar por una misa
    tutanada con alaridos (cantada) en el palo gueco (pulpito), con
    regaños en el tapanco (sermon) y con jumaderas en l’oyit’ el
    cuajo (incensario)._

    A shepherd told the curate that he wished to pay for a mass
    (_tutanada_) with shouts (sung) in the hollow stick (pulpit)
    with scoldings in the stall (sermon) and with smokes in the
    little hole of the bladder (censer).

    42. A woman had a neighbor who everybody said was a witch.
    One night when she went to sleep with her she could not sleep
    because she was so frightened.

    About midnight the witch got up, took out her eyes and put
    them on a plate, took off her arms and legs and hung them up
    carefully, and then herself turned into a wolf and went out by
    the chimney.

    (In another version the woman goes away, unchanged, riding on a
    broomstick. Collected by Miss Matilda Allen.)


A STORY OF LONG TIME AGO AT ÁCOMA[172]

or,

The Melons of Discord

(Ácoma Pueblo)

    A long time ago, the people of Ácoma used to live on the
    mesa below the present village. One day during that time the
    governor announced to his people that there would be a rabbit
    hunt on the following day and advised them to get their shoes,
    clubs, bows, and arrows ready. So early the next morning
    the whole village, except the governor’s daughter, whom he
    commanded to stay at home, set out for the hunt.

    But the daughter did not like to remain behind alone, so
    shortly after the others had gone, and contrary to her father’s
    wishes, she followed the party. That afternoon as the villagers
    were cleaning rabbits for their evening meal, she overtook
    them and hid behind a rock. A young man coming in late to join
    the others passed near by and startled her so that she made a
    movement that betrayed her.

    “What are you doing?” he asked.

    “I am trying to get a rabbit out from under this rock,” she
    answered.

    Then the young man, who had many rabbits strung around his
    belt, gave a number of them to the girl and they went together
    to join the rest of the party. The people were surprised to
    see that the girl had killed so many rabbits; but her father,
    the governor, was angry.

    The hunt lasted four days. After they returned the governor,
    together with all of the villagers, scolded the daughter for
    her disobedience and ostracized her.

    On the following day when everyone was busy preparing to dance
    a _kachina_ dance in celebration of the success of the hunt,
    the governor’s daughter ran over to the Zuñi village, four
    miles to the west of Ácoma, and told the Zuñis that her people
    were having a dance. She invited them to come and dance too.

    The Zuñis accepted the invitation and went to Ácoma loaded with
    melons, colored corn, and some of all of the fruits of their
    harvest. The Ácomas did not have any real melons. They danced
    with the melons made of dyed buckskin; and so when the first
    relay of their dance was over and the Zuñis danced in with
    their melons, the Ácomas were jealous. They demanded to know
    why the Zuñis were intruding themselves into their _fiesta_.
    Angry words followed and the Zuñis returned home enraged.

    Then the Ácomas urged their governor to prepare for war, but
    he refused to do so; and the villagers, remembering the spirit
    in which the Zuñi Indians had left them, hastily removed their
    possessions to the top of the high mesa, and built the present
    village of Ácoma, leaving the governor alone on the mesa below.

    Shortly thereafter the Zuñis came in their war paint and,
    finding only the governor in a deserted village, they slew him
    and returned home again.

    Six days later the governor’s daughter went back to Ácoma and
    perhaps lived happily ever after. Because a governor mistreated
    his daughter and she avenged herself is the reason that Ácoma
    occupies its present inaccessible position.




Chapter XIV

KERESAN MYTHS

    Curiosity and credulity are the characteristics of the
    savage intellect. When a phenomenon presents itself, the
    savage requires an explanation and that explanation he makes
    for himself or receives from tradition in the shape of a
    myth.—ANDREW LANG.


Although it is possible to regard the current beliefs of the Indian
concerning his origin, his migrations, and his religion, as largely
mythical, all such events are of a grandiose and serious character.
Besides these major beliefs, there exists a vast number of lesser myths
and superstitions, as well as familiar folk-tales, which are not to be
overlooked, since they have almost as much power over the primitive mind
as the more essential matters in his history and his faith. Careful
inquiry has proved that a myth is rarely or never confined to a single
tribe, and that certain myths can be traced from the Atlantic to the
Pacific. It is common knowledge also that as a myth travels its poetic
factor tends to predominate. We should expect to find, as we do, that
myth forms are most nearly alike in contiguous tribes, and most unlike
in those separated by great distances. Hence the myths of Ácoma are part
of the general lore of the Southwest. One group of scholars considers
that myths should be restricted to such tales as have an explanatory
tendency (which is easily overestimated), and would differentiate
between mythical tales on the one hand, and mythical ideas or concepts on
the other, for they say we can gain much information about the first of
these but very little about the second. Of “explanatory myths,” moreover,
there are two forms,—inclusive and particularistic. The first is well
exemplified by a culture-hero who “taught the people all the arts,”
and the second by a culture-hero who taught the people merely one art,
hitherto unknown, such as basket making. Another illustration is the
myth of the Thunder Bird, so widely believed in that it is used by some
authorities as a typical mythical concept. The conventionalized figure
is found in many silver ornaments, upon the pottery, and upon scores of
baskets. At Ácoma the best of her potters make a fine design of it upon
plaques and vessels of various sorts. Apparently the underlying idea
of this myth is of a bird flying through the heavens, so huge that he
darkens the skies. The flapping of his wings is the thunder, the winking
of his eyes causes the lightning, and so forth.

    Fair weather signifies that the bird is in good humor; bad
    weather that he is displeased. A big black bird therefore
    seems to answer fairly well the inquiries of the native mind
    regarding the phenomena of storms.[173]

    All myths have at least one universal feature, animals and
    heavenly bodies are endowed with human qualities, and associate
    indiscriminately with man. [Powell tells us that whatever
    challenges attention, gives rise to a myth.[174]]

If, then, the “tawny patch on the shoulder of a rabbit,” the antlers of a
deer, the crest of a bird, are full of meaning to the Indian mind, we can
understand that there must be an inexhaustible store of tales, varying
from tribe to tribe with the living creatures and the local conditions
that obtain in each. Though we to-day after the long sophistication of
the years may regard this phase as childish, ignorant, and superstitious,
and resent its tyrannous fettering of the human mind, we must remember
that it was the only view of life possible at the period of its sway—a
life of Nature, speaking with many voices, sensitive to every changing
facet of the created world—and that from such rude beginnings all
primitive religion and poetry have arisen. We cannot afford to ignore or
lose the only contribution thereto made on the western continent.

Myths represent incidents long past and not to be repeated, those which
occurred in the morning of the world when man had few or none of his
present customs and arts. Folk-tales, on the other hand, are busied with
more recent events and may even be woven about present-day occurrences.
The myth therefore appeals especially to the imagination and the
emotions, and to that deep-seated belief of the Indian that the world of
sense and the world of spirit are so intimately linked that the former is
ruled in minutest detail by the latter.[175]

The “ritualization of myths”[176] takes place when an attempt is made
to weave together these far-away happenings into a consistent tribal,
clan, or fraternity story, the telling of which is frequently accompanied
by ceremonies. Since there is usually a desire shown to arrange these
chronologically, they may become an historical record of the tribe’s
beginnings. At the same time, it must never be forgotten that these myths
are handed down verbally by the older men of the tribe through successive
generations, and must suffer certain alterations and embellishments as
time passes.

Strong resemblances exist between the origin-legends of all the different
Pueblo tribes, though each has its own variants. There is almost total
absence of intimate studies of the Ácoma tradition, such as have been
made with elaborate care and detail for both the Hopi and the Zuñi. It
is not possible to set forth any origin or religious myths as positively
or exclusively those of the Ácomas, yet since they, like the people of
Sía, only seventy miles away, both belong to the Keresan nation, we feel
something like assurance in assuming that the Ácoma legends must be
closely similar[177] to those described in the distinguished researches
of Sía.

To all Pueblo Indians the world was flat and round, like a great
disk. Before there was any life, the All-Father existed alone in the
Somewhere, and immemorial darkness covered all space. This primal
All-Father “thought outward into space” until mists finally penetrated
the thick and universal blackness, and the Middle Place appeared,
guarded by Six Warriors. In some legends, a god named Po-shai-an-ki-a
is identical with the All-Father, whereas in others he is only an early
culture hero, giver of domestic animals and of wealth. In the larger
number of legends the Spider—Sussistinnaka[178]—is the All-Father,
sometimes spoken of as a male, and in other tribes as a female, deity.
In Sía myths, however, the spider is the first living creature of the
underworld, dominating the actions of all other beings.

The creation of light follows that of the Middle Place, and the sun
becomes not only an emanation from the All-Father, but the Supreme Being
himself,[179] and Mother Earth is his complement. The Pueblo world is
divided into six regions, each having its centre in a spring somewhere
in the heart of a great mountain, on whose summit is a gigantic tree. I
combine the phrasing of the myths of two Keresan pueblos to make more
clear these six “points of the compass,” as we call them.[180] Each of
them has its especial color-symbol, which, however, is not uniformly
assigned by all tribes.

                              Tree     Region            Guardian Warrior

  1. Mountain of the North   Spruce  Barren Plains       Long Tail
                                                         (_Mountain Lion_)

  2. Mountain of the West    Pine    Home of Waters      Clumsy Foot
                                                         (_Bear_)

  3. Mountain of the South   Oak     Place of Beautiful  Blackmark-Face
                                           Red           (_Badger_)

  4. Mountain of the East    Aspen   Home of the Day     Hangtail
                                                         (_Wolf_)

  5. Mountain of the Zenith  Cedar   Home of the High    Whitecap
                                                         (_Eagle_)

  6. Mountain of the Nadir   Oak     Home of the Low     _Mole_

In Sía legends, those presumably most closely akin to Ácoma, the
creation was performed by the Spider, who drew two lines of meal upon
the lighted ground, which, by crossing each other, made four equal
squares. He then seated himself close to two parcels placed in the
two upper spaces, and chanted a low, sweet song, to which the parcels
“rattled” an accompaniment, and presently out of each walked a woman.
One, named Utset, was the mother of all Indians; the other, Nowutset, the
progenitress of all other people upon earth. Two male heroes called The
Twins, with names varying in different tribes, are universally described
as Dark and Light, having been born of a mother sometimes called The
Dawn, who died in giving them birth. These mythical heroes live in the
east, and the Twin called Light is always white—the “fixed emblem of
peace, friendship, happiness, propriety, purity, and holiness.”[181]
Light and Life, Darkness and Death, have been synonymous in all systems
of religion.

At first the earth was very hot, so that it melted, but later the people
lacked fire. In all the tribes we find a universal folk-tale of the Theft
of Fire, and generally it is Coyote who is commissioned to bring it from
beyond the Kingdom of Sussistinnako—a difficult and delicate task, for
there were three doors to pass, guarded first by the Snake, then by the
Cougar, and lastly by the Bear. When, finally, human beings began to
people the earth and had to disperse, their place of egress from the
underworld, in which all men and animals were born, was Si-pa-pu, and it
is to Si-pa-pu again that the spirits of those who die must return. The
road to and from Si-pa-pu is always spoken of as crowded by the two lines
of spirits passing each other, the ghostly forms of the dead crossing
those who are yet to be born into life.[182]

    Life is the sunward hemisphere, a line
    Invisibly, immeasurably fine
    That perilously hangs between the vast
    Unborn-to-come and no-more-living past.[183]

We find also the idea of death in life associated with the dying day, and
perhaps this is the origin of the expression of the soldier lads in the
World War who spoke of their comrades as “going west.” Rest from labor
with the setting sun led naturally to the search for some place of repose
for the weary soul in that region where the sun had sunk from sight of
mortal eyes.

One myth that Pueblo Indians possess in common with each other and with
almost all primitive peoples is that of a culture-hero, regarded as the
ancestor of a tribe, sometimes even as the creator of the universe.[184]
This half-divine being appeared on earth while all was still chaos,
taught the people their arts, and, having established their social and
religious order, vanished, not by death but in some mysterious manner,
promising to return to earth when the appointed time should arrive.[185]

Among the Pueblos, this many-sided culture-hero is known as
Montezuma,[186] and “is the centre of some of the most poetic myths
found in ancient American mythology.” Many places in New Mexico claim
to be his birthplace, and the variety of aspects under which Montezuma
is presented is due to the fact that each tribe jealously guards its
individual legends concerning his achievements. Emory wrote in 1847:

    The Pueblos speak of every event preceding the Spanish Conquest
    as of the days of Montezuma. Among the Pueblos, the Navajos,
    and the Apaches, the name of Montezuma is as familiar as
    is Washington to us. This is the more curious as none of
    these tribes are related in any way to the Aztec race by
    language.[187]

An old tradition given as common to all Pueblo Indians is to the effect
that they had no kinship with nomad tribes but were “a people seated on
the soil,” and that they were “Children of Montezuma;[188] when he and
his subjects were hard pressed by the Spaniards, they were summoned south
to help in the succor of the City of Mexico, from whence none of them
ever returned.” There is no foundation in fact for this legend, but a
reasonable explanation for the picturesque tale is given by Bandelier,
who says: “The Mexican Nahautl language has left positive traces, through
the Indians from Central Mexico and the Spaniards themselves, who brought
them to New Mexico as their servants.”[189]

One is surprised and impressed by so often coming across analogies,
in the tales of these so-called barbarians, with those which have all
the charm and authority of classic antiquity. For example, there are
everywhere among the Indians legends of a great flood and of mountains
of refuge which correspond to Ararat, though the actual locality varies
with the different tribes, just as is true of Si-pa-pu, their place of
emergence from the underworld. This was in truth so continuously heard
by the Spanish padres when first they came upon North American soil that
they were wont to affirm the Indian religion to be a pervert from their
own sacred theology.

In some of the tribes we find the belief that when the waters covered
the earth, all living things perished save Montezuma and his friend
Coyote. They had built a boat and moored it high on the summit of Santa
Rosa (their Ararat) in case of need. Montezuma in some of the tales thus
became the founder of the Indian pueblos, of which Ácoma was the first
and Pecos the second.

    He entrusted to their guardianship the sacred fire, [and it
    was at Pecos, before disappearing from their sight, that] he
    planted a tree upside down and bade them watch it well, for
    when that tree should fall and the fire die out, then he would
    return from the far East, and lead his royal people to victory
    and power. When the present generations saw their land glide,
    mile by mile, into the rapacious hands of the Yankee, when new
    and strange diseases desolated their homes, finally when in
    1846 the sacred tree was prostrated, and the guardian of the
    holy fire was found dead on its ashes, then they thought the
    hour of deliverance had come, and every morning at earliest
    dawn a watcher mounted to the house-tops, and gazed long and
    anxiously in the lightening east, hoping to descry the noble
    form of Montezuma advancing through the morning beams at the
    head of a conquering army.[190]

A variation of the deluge myth was told me at Isleta. The people there
believe that this continent was never overtaken by the great flood, and
that consequently the American Indian is in descent from the oldest
race that has had a continuous existence upon earth. In the summer of
1922 some fragments of this myth were told me by my host at the Rito de
los Frijoles, who had been shown “a very ancient manuscript by an aged
Indian, who had spent two days” in relating to him the Montezuma legend,
which the Indian affirmed had no connection with the Aztec king of the
same name.

We also meet among these American aborigines a world-wide myth which is
probably most familiar in the Minotaur, or in the legend of St. George,
who rescued the Libyan princess when she was chosen by lot to feed the
terrible dragon outside her father’s city, and who remained to convert
that heathen people to Christianity.

Professor Espinosa[191] found among the Pueblos a myth of the Monster
Viper which he is inclined to believe is purely Indian in origin—probably
derived from the Aztec. He says that the Indians were very vague about
it, or wished to deny it; but the legend is that in each pueblo is hidden
a monster viper to which several children are fed every year.

In New Mexico the belief is said to be widespread that the gradual
extinction of the Pueblo tribes there is due to the fact that
child-sacrifice no longer exists. Professor Espinosa has reason to
believe that it was at some time a common practice.[192] Mrs. Stevenson
no later than 1886 believed that she discovered that in at least two Tewa
pueblos the rattlesnake was propitiated by human sacrifice, either of
the youngest female, or failing this, of an adult woman who had neither
husband nor children—if such could be found.

We have very little to contribute about myths peculiar to Ácoma, but
Dr. Parsons[193] has discovered much concerning those that relate to
maternity-beliefs and practices there and at Laguna, and to her articles
the interested reader is referred. It must suffice here to mention only
a bare outline of the birth myth about which undoubtedly clusters, as is
true at Sía, much that is especially sacred and secret. All Ácoma clans
are maternal and exogamous, and many are the “beliefs of sympathetic
magic in connection with conception, pregnancy, and growth.” At Ácoma
the ritual for the increase of children is especially associated with
the Santu cult,[194] which, contrary to the case in most tribes, is both
at Ácoma and Laguna a male deity. “The Santu is regarded as a source of
light, in the same sense of life, and also a specific for rain,” and
therefore a power directly able to further fertility, whether in plants
or in animals. As such his favor is besought at the winter solstice
ceremonial by particular offerings at his altar. To it women desiring
children bring clay figures of a baby (_wiha_), and other prenatal
practices are arranged. The Santu then is supposed to lie in for four
days after the winter solstice, and all about him are placed images of
domestic animals, rings, bracelets, and so forth. When the birth is close
at hand, the human mother is carefully watched by her grandmother, and
for four days after the child has come into the world she also lies in,
with an ear of corn close beside her baby. “On the fourth morning the
‘Medicine Man’ and his wife arrive sometime before dawn. He prays and
sings four or five songs, after which he takes the child out to the east
side of the mesa to show it at sunrise to the Sun God. The child’s mother
goes along, and during the ceremonial sprinkles sacred meal.” The child’s
forehead, body, and legs are anointed with ashes in the form of a cross,
“because witches do not like ashes.”

The christening does not take place for seven or eight months because,
if the baby does not live, it is better not to have to remember it with
a name. When the time for this ceremony is decided upon, it is held in
the church, in the presence of its godparents, who make the child a gift
and then carry it to their own house, where its head is washed, “an
interesting instance of the way the Catholic rite may be combined with
native practice.” Presents must be exchanged between godparents and the
child on every following Christmas. What Indian name is given we may
never know; for more common is the nickname, given later to describe
some characteristic trait, or act, when a child’s personality becomes
apparent. A happy little girl may be called “Laughs in the Morning,” or
a fleet-footed boy who has shot his coyote will thereafter be known as
“Flying Wolf.”[195] Then, usually, the Roman priest administers Christian
baptism and bestows a Spanish name. If the child goes to an American
school, he or she is sure to receive an American name, and by the last,
to us as visitors from the outside, is most likely to be introduced.
Thus we have another complex to add to all the others, none of which
appears to confuse or disturb the serenity of the Indian.

Many writers about Indian life in the pueblos emphasize the obedience
of the children and speak of punishment by parents as being so little
merited that it is an almost unheard-of event. The fact appears to be
that parents terrify their children at a very early age with tales of
supernatural beings and their evil powers, so that to utter a single
talismanic word, like _el coco_, or _d’agüelo_, suffices to subdue the
naughtiest infant. They obey from fear, not of their parents, but of the
unseen powers. The _Agüelo_ (Spanish _abuelo_, for grandfather)[196] is a
very old man who goes about the pueblos during Christmas week to see if
all the children have learned their prayers properly. He is feared more
than anything else, and the children always give him sweets and cakes to
put in the bag he carries, but it is quite large enough to hold naughty
children also. At each home he makes himself known by a loud knock on the
door, and by the cry, _El Agüelo, El Agüelo! Aquí viene el Agüelo_![197]
The children must at once appear and recite their prayers, after which
he forms a circle with them and they dance from right to left, and then
from left to right, singing at the same time some verses. Children who
are frightened into good behavior all the year through by a mythical
bugaboo cannot be expected to differentiate him from the one they
actually see and propitiate at Christmas time.[198]

The deeper our study of Indian inheritances, the stronger grows the
conviction that, while the white conqueror has imposed upon the race
the outward observance of conventions in daily conduct, in morals and
religion, the mental attitude toward most of these things has not changed
in the slightest degree.

The conclusion of the whole matter is therefore that all Indians divide
the phenomena of nature, including man, into human and superhuman, and to
him almost every natural phenomenon is a mystery. As the Reverend J. Owen
Dorsey, a first authority on the subject, puts it: “Even man himself may
become mysterious by fasting, prayer, and vision,” and this was indeed
the chief function of the cacique, who by acts such as these expiated
vicariously the sins of his clan.

If the dictum of a wise man be justified, that “every man is to a greater
or less extent a dual personality,” the American Indian should rank as
the most evenly developed of all human creatures, since duality is the
essence of his being.




Chapter XV

RELIGIOUS BELIEFS

    The theatre of the world is the theatre of necromancy: and the
    gods are the primaeval wonder-workers. The primitive religion
    of every American Indian tribe is an organized system of
    inducing the ancients to take part in the affairs of men and
    the worship of the gods is a system designed to please the
    gods, that they may be induced to act particularly for the
    tribe of men who are the worshippers.—J. W. POWELL.


If we are to attempt to understand the Pueblo Indian it becomes necessary
to preface our inquiry by a brief outline, however superficial, of those
general aspects of his religious belief and practice which scholars have
agreed to consider as part of the common heritage of the race. In this
Ácoma must inevitably share.

There is no manifestation of the Indian character more extraordinary
than his elaborate religious and ritual organization. Fundamental to any
real interpretation of Indian life, it is so bewilderingly intricate and
so elusive that we can here touch upon only a few of the more definite
aspects. No one not a master of this subject can treat it briefly without
doing it a certain violence. It is impossible to say that _the Indian_
in general believes this or that, for while there are a few essential
deities in his hierarchy that are almost universally accepted, though
varying somewhat in nomenclature through the tribes, the differences
are legion.[199] Each nation presents its own galaxy of gods who must be
separately described to give a just impression of the whole. Wissler says
there is “nothing like the supreme over-ruling and personal being” such
as we name God, but that the Indian “seems rather to have formed complex
and abstract notions of a controlling power or series of powers pervading
the universe.”[200] Thrust into life, man finds himself surrounded by
potencies wholly beyond his control. These powers, supernal or infernal,
must therefore be propitiated, and if man in his ignorance has offended,
expiation must be offered and endured. The commonest form of address
used in prayers and sacrifices is to “Those Above.” On the authority of
a full-blooded Dakota Indian (Ohiyesa),[201] well known by his American
name of Charles Alexander Eastman, we are told that the religion of
his race is the last thing a white man can hope to understand, for it
is something no Indian, still firm in his own faith, will ever talk
about, since he is convinced that neither it nor the ceremonies of its
celebration will be rightly interpreted.

Where all is so vague as to escape true analysis, the question arises,
why separate myth and religion? Are they not practically one and
inclusive? Alexander discusses this briefly and ably, and concludes that
with the Indian, as with all other peoples, it is impossible to

    identify religion with mythology. The two are intimately
    related; every mythology is an effort to define a religion;
    and yet there is no profound parallelism between god and hero,
    no immutable relation between religious ceremony and mythic
    tale. [To illustrate his meaning he affirms that] the greatest
    of Indian mythic heroes, the Trickster-Transformer, is nowhere
    important in ritual, while Father-Sky and Mother-Earth are of
    rare appearance in tales.[202]

The race as a whole has been classed among the “sun worshippers”[203]
from their conviction that the sun is the highest manifestation of
nature, without which no living thing can thrive. As their forefathers
faced in silent adoration the golden globe coming out of the nebulous
dawn, or, from that high-placed _kiva_ in the cliffs of the Rito de
los Frijoles, stood mute and motionless till it sank from sight beyond
the farthest reach of the eye, it was the omnipresent spirit within
the sun, but never the orb itself, to which they paid reverence. Such
a contemplative worship, with its touch of orientalism, permits us to
accept the appellation of “The Great Mystery” as their idea of deity.
In most tribes the spirits of the earth, the sky, and water are nearly
or quite equal to the sun. Below these, whom we may call the Great
Gods, who cannot descend to earth in visible form, there is an infinite
number of lesser deities—the half-gods, and still further to complicate
such a system every deity possesses many attributes, and may at any
time manifest himself under any one of a great variety of forms. Among
the lesser gods are the thunder and lightning, the serpent, and the
bird. Each of these has his especial power and his appointed mission
to perform. He must therefore be individually appealed to in prayer,
propitiated by offerings at secret shrines of earth, or thanked at
appropriate seasons for benefits conferred upon weak humans, watchers of
“this ominous and treacherous world.”[204]

From such a composite hierarchy it is apparent that the popular idea of
“one Great Spirit” worshipped by the Indian race is a romantic fancy,
unless by it is meant Nature—Nature in all of her manifestations of
plants and animals, and rocks, and heavenly bodies. The Indian belief, in
fact, belongs to the system called hecastotheism, the opposite extreme
from monotheism, in which, to quote Cushing,

    all beings, whether deistic and supernatural, or animistic
    and mortal, are regarded as belonging to one system; and that
    they are believed to be related by blood seems to be indicated
    by the fact that human beings are spoken of as “the children
    of men,” while _all_ other beings are referred to as “the
    Fathers,” and “All-Fathers” and “Our Fathers.”[205]

It is the eternal contest between the material and the spiritual that
was to the Indian an omnipresent prepossession. Through the powerful
theocratic organization of the community in its social as well as in its
hieratic aspects, and by the songs and prayers of a hoary antiquity,
the whole year is a complex of ceremonies. This is more especially
the case in the maize-growing countries. From birth to death the
Indians were aware of mysterious environing forces, some beautiful and
fortune-bringing, others inimical and disastrous. To the end that life
should be made endurable, a large number of esoteric organizations was
everywhere established, each of which employed a special ritual at
an appointed time. Among the Keres, there were originally four such
priesthoods,[206] but the march of modern ideas has gradually eliminated
some of these in certain of the villages. Highest of these groups were
the Ya-Ya (mothers) to which the caciques belonged; then came the
medicine men, the warriors, and the hunters.

Frazer points out that in the most primitive societies the practice of
magic was for individual gain, but that, as community life evolved, it
was employed for the benefit of the tribe. Sacrifice and prayer were the
means by which the gods, the personal agents of elemental forces, were
induced to bestow favors upon the whole people. Consequently it signified
a great advance in social progress when a class of magic-practising men
was set apart to bring prosperity to their tribe, whether this was for
the control of the weather, and so indirectly for the increase of foods,
or for the healing of diseases.

Although everywhere these priests were given terrible power, often
ruthlessly exercised, they were,

    take it all in all, productive of incalculable good to
    humanity. They were the direct predecessors of our physicians
    and surgeons, of our investigators and discoverers in every
    branch of natural science.[207]

The entire highly complicated program as practised by the Pueblo Indian
may be summed up as a system of religious ideas which have as their
objective counterparts bundles of fetishes, which help to serve the
good of the clan, or fraternity, or community at large. According to
Kroeber, “Among the Pueblos each priest is the curator of a sacred object
or fetish, carefully bundled and preserved.” The mere display of these
objects upon an altar made of meal or sand is a prayer to “those above.”
The fetishes may not themselves be thought of as divine, but they do
represent something of the same concept as does the crucifix above the
High Altar of the Roman church. And they have the direct quality, as
medicine-objects, of bringing succor to those in distress. To quote
Kroeber once more:

    It looks therefore as if the American priesthood had originated
    in association with these two ceremonial traits of the fetish
    bundle and the painted altar—both conspicuously unknown in the
    Eastern hemisphere.[208]

There is scarcely any limit to the fetishes that exist, for they are
mediators between men and the deified animal or object which each
particular fetish represents, and they are therefore an essential
accompaniment of all dances, or other rites, also of all the supreme
events of life, such as birth, adolescence, and death. In the most
unlikely clefts of the mountain or in hidden spots of earth curious
little bundles are found that betoken the shrine of some fetish.[209]

Probably the oldest of all religious cults is the worship of the serpent,
so often curiously mingled with that of the sun, as, for instance, in
the pantheon of the Aztecs. In his “Origin of Civilization,” Sir John
Lubbock says that, “as an object of worship the serpent is preëminent
among ancients.”[210] Do we not also know that in that period which the
historian Gibbon calls the happiest and most prosperous of the human
race—the era of Marcus Aurelius—the Romans sent every year a troop of
young girls to feed a great serpent asleep within a sacred cave, and
that if any of the maidens were impure the serpent did not eat and the
harvest of that year was a failure? How many visitors to the pueblos
of the American Indian comprehend the profound reason for the awe that
underlies the worship there of what is to the average white man an
object of repulsion if not of fear—the rattlesnake? Yet it is easy to
understand when explained. It has long been observed that the mysterious
force by which all things move, whether on earth, in the sky, or under
the sea, is regarded by the savage as so inexplicable that he believes
it to be controlled by unseen beings of superhuman power. Consequently,
the continuous movement of a serpent, whether slow or swift, without any
visible aid to locomotion, would strike the primitive man as especially
mysterious; add to this its power of hypnosis, its immortality achieved
through the annual shedding of its skin, and lastly, a death-dealing
sting, and we see reason enough why savages should regard a creature,
thus endowed with gifts he has not, with such awe and fear as would lead
to an intense desire to propitiate the occult power. Given desire of
sufficient intensity, it may in itself become worship.

Various scholars have pointed out that not only is the zig-zag form of
lightning the natural sky symbol of the serpent, but that since both
may kill instantaneously when they strike, there is another logical
association of ideas between them.[211] The plumed serpent,[212] Awanyu,
was guardian of the waters, and had for his sky emblem the rippling
course of the Milky Way. Although the snake ceremonial is thought of as
chiefly a prayer for rain, it had an equally intimate connection with the
bestowal of health, reminding us of the classic myth in which the symbol
of Esculapius was a serpent.

If white visitors to the communal dances of any of the tribes, but let us
say particularly to the snake dances of Hopi-land, would only recognize
that this whole performance is an incantation or invocation to the gods,
giving thanks for the harvests of the year, and would refrain from
laughter and other unseemly expressions that are sacrilege to the Indian,
they would greatly help toward the mutual good-will and understanding of
the two races.

From the plumed serpent to the adoration of the bird is an easy
transition for the Indian mind. Do we not read in the wisdom of Solomon:
“There be three things which are too wonderful for me; and the chief of
these were the way of an eagle in the air, the way of a serpent on a
rock”? And in truth what is more enviable than a bird, that, spurning the
earth, may overtop the clouds, pouring out his melody as he soars; or,
like the eagle, proud, swift, and sudden, may swoop to clutch his prey
and be aloft again in the flash of a moment.[213]

The Keres to which the Ácomas belong regard Sky Father—synonymous with
Sun Father—and Earth Mother as the great deities. Haeberlein tells us
the common Southwest concept is that the Earth Mother while lying down
is impregnated either by a sunbeam or a drop of water. In either case
rain must effect the union and the fertilization. He calls the specific
psychologic characteristic of Pueblo culture the “idea of fertilization,”
because all their ceremonies are focused upon the production of fertility
for the fields. He further maintains that this psychologic aspect cannot
be disposed of as an independent element, nor as a mere accessory, but
that “it is at every point in time, and space, inherently associated with
the historical side”;[214] that is, it has entered materially into every
new idea or form of worship that developed in their midst.

Lakes and springs are more or less consciously identified by the Keres
with Si-pa-pu, the place of exit from the underworld, where the Earth
Goddess gave birth to the clans of men. Hence such water is the most
direct path of communication with the gods of fertilization, of which a
water monster is the symbol. The Keres believe that the Twin war gods
received from the Sun Father bows, arrows, and lightning-bolts as
weapons; in the ceremony the lightning is not a death-dealing weapon of
war, but only a bringer of rain. Here we have a concrete illustration
of that duality which is so characteristic of the Indian and often so
puzzling to the white observer. Kroeber considers it in part, at any
rate, a deliberate repetition connected with a tendency toward exacting
elaboration of ceremonial. The idea here is that when the Twins meet,
the clouds cause rain to fall. Hence the war captain and his lieutenant
always impersonate the Twins. There are significant secondary psychologic
associations illustrated by these dual concepts, for these gods are at
the same time deities of war and of fertilization. In one game we find
netted wheels to symbolize the war shields of the Twins, which were spun
from clouds. The Hopi women, on the other hand, play the Dart and Wheel
game as the magic of fertilization. Here is another illustration of the
universal belief in magic power, which human activity of the right sort
may influence in order that the life of man may be safeguarded and led
forward to a desired goal.

The K’at’sina, who impersonate the gods in the masked dances, were,
according to Keres ideas, created in the underworld by Utset, an earth
goddess. She sent them to live in the west, which is therefore their
traditional home. They are variously described as rain-makers, as deified
spirits of ancestors, or, as one writer calls them, as “a heterogeneous
crowd.”

Goddard says of the K’at’sina that in them we have one of the most
outstanding features of the ceremonial and religious life of the
Southwest:

    They are a logical and almost necessary adjunct to any serious
    attempt at dramatization by a people who are accustomed to
    think and to represent feelings and concepts by means of
    symbols. To the initiated they vicariously represent gods, and
    are for the time being endowed with the supernatural nature and
    power of the gods. To uninitiated children, and to many women,
    these masked men are the actual gods.[215]

Enough has been said to show that symbolism plays a large rôle in Indian
beliefs and in daily life.

Among the most sacred symbols of the Indians was the number four,
undoubtedly derived from the four cardinal points, which, like most of
the primitives, the aborigine in his wanderings identified with the
daily journey of the heavenly bodies; and with the winds, which were the
spirits of the cardinal points that brought about changes of weather and
of seasons. The amazing extent of the application of this sacred four is
beyond the scope of this work, but a few examples will illustrate the
astonishing variety of its use:

    1. There are four houses, or stages of emergence, for all
    living things from nothingness into the world of sense.

    2. There are four primordial creators of life.

    3. Four festivals are annually celebrated, at each of which
    four priests officiate.

    4. Four times each day are prayers offered to the gods.

    5. After a birth, the mother lies in for four days.

    6. To each of the four cardinal points an arrow is shot at
    baptism.

    7. For four days after a death, food is placed upon the graves.

    8. Mourning lasts from four days to four weeks or even four
    years.[216]

All the first missionaries who came out to New Mexico with the
_Conquistadores_ were of the Franciscan order. Very keen were these
ardent apostles to watch the native mind, and to make use of every point
of approach or community of idea that would help the savage to grasp
the new religion they offered him. One of the first aids undoubtedly
toward this end was their recognition of certain emblems or totems
that they found in Indian villages, which bore some resemblance to
Christian symbols. In this they were but following the example set
them by the earliest of their faith, who took over as far as possible
pagan characters, such as we may see in the Roman catacombs. May we not
believe that, as they found among the barbarians symbols such as the
cross, or a ritual of sprinkling and of head-washing somewhat akin to
Christian baptism, through which initial links of understanding could
be established between them and the Indians, so they must soon have
perceived that in the Canticle of the Sun, given them by their founder,
Saint Francis, there was another possibility of mental approach, deeper
and more embracing than any other? The Canticle does not indeed proclaim
the “worship of all creatures,” but its communion with all elemental
life surely forged a bond between them and the aborigine, which made the
Indian more willing to listen to this new religion, and which aided the
priests in forcing upon them its acceptance:

    Praised be my Lord with all his creatures and specially Our
    brother, the Sun, who brings us the day. He signifies to us
    Thee! and—for our sister the Moon ... for our brother the Wind,
    and for Air and Cloud. And for our sister Water who is very
    serviceable unto us, and precious and clear.... And for our
    brother Fire. And for our Mother, the Earth, the which doth
    sustain us and keep us and bringeth forth divers fruits and
    flowers of many colours, and grass.

Mrs. Nuttall, after long years of study, concludes that the
constellations of Ursa Major and Ursa Minor were a guiding principle of
the Aztec calendar and furnished the archetype of the varied forms of
the swastika and of the cross symbol.[217] She gives 4000 B.C. as an
approximate date for the first use of this symbol. Certainly the swastika
forms a favorite design for amulets, and for the decoration of baskets
and pottery, among the Pueblo artists, and since it is agreed that nearly
every ornament has its symbolic purpose, have we not here perhaps one
more point of contact? At all events, the cross unquestionably existed in
America for a very long time before the coming of the “men with faces
white like snow who came in wooden houses with wings.” Did not Castañeda
write, upon finding some cross-shaped prayer-sticks, “in some way the
Indians must have received light from our Redeemer Christ”? In fact the
padres found the cross below our Rock of Ácoma as well as elsewhere, and
questioned whether it could be due to “the pious labors of St. Thomas or
to the sacrilegious subtlety of Satan.” However they settled so obscure
a problem, the Indian familiarity with the cross symbol—something both
races held in reverence—undoubtedly helped the Franciscans to spread
their gospel of the cross of Christ.

It is interesting to recall that the rosary and the double cross date in
the Indian country from Espéjo’s time (1582) when he forced the natives
to wear it as a token of allegiance to Spain and to the Roman church.

John G. Bourke says in 1884 that at Santo Domingo

    the Indians were chanting the rosary in a manner so strange and
    so thoroughly Indian that he was convinced he was listening to
    original music antedating the introduction of Christianity,
    which the Spanish padres had quietly allowed to be fused with
    their own ritual, simply changing the application.

Another example of such “application” is the rule that everyone must be
signed with a cross of ashes on Ash Wednesday, according to the practice
of the Roman church.

So interwoven with real religion are fear and superstition in the mind
of aboriginal man that we find everywhere in primitive society a belief
in witchcraft. It is then a safe clue toward an understanding of many
unusual things which the observant visitor sees in New Mexico.

Witches are mischievous beings, doing ill to their neighbors in pure
wantonness of mood, for little or no reason. Since this is so, there is
no outward characteristic that distinguishes a witch, and we are told
that part of the aloofness and also of the courtesy shown strangers is
because anyone may prove capable of doing the household an injury. Father
Dumarest writes:

    To understand the fear Indians have of witches we must realize
    that they believe witches to be a race apart, men like
    themselves, but endowed with evil power, power to kill when
    insulted.... If there is a great drought after the dance of
    _Shiwanna_,[218] witches are at the bottom of it. Witches then
    there always will be in the world, and incessant conflicts
    between witches and _Cheani_. Many join the witch society every
    year. Whoever consents to become a member, may choose the
    especial powers he wishes to exert, but on the sole condition
    that he sacrifices the being dearest to him.[219] Once a
    member of the witch society, always a member. The very word
    _Kanakiaia_ (witch) is the terror of all women and children,
    and of the majority of the men. In 1896 a terrible epidemic
    ravaged the pueblos of the Rio Grande, and the West. At Cochití
    they attributed the epidemic to witchcraft. Spies watched day
    and night about the cemetery and the churches. One of the men
    pursued a monster he discovered prowling about, and when they
    came to grips the witch was found to be a _Koshare_; both died
    the next day, and the people said the _Koshare_ confessed he
    was dying of the harm he had done. [Father Dumarest affirms
    only this:] I buried them both the same day; the next day the
    Kasik made a search of the house of the _Koshare_ and found in
    a pot a stone image with owl eyes, feathers of owl and crow; so
    the Kasik was convinced that the _Koshare_ had been a witch,
    and of his numerous family only two children survived.[220]

The most frequent metamorphoses of human beings into animals for the
purpose of practising witchcraft are into the owl (_tecolete_) or the
fox. The hoot of the owl is therefore a portent of evil, and brings a
shudder to every Indian. In New Mexico one of many ways of discovering a
witch is to plant a broom at the door surmounted by a small cross made
from straws of the same broom; or the broom may be put behind a door
with a cross formed of two needles. “If a woman is a witch she will not
leave the house till broom and cross are removed.”[221] Witches are the
cause of all illness. For instance, all skin diseases are attributed
to the “angry ants,” and toothache is especially dreaded as a sign of
the displeasure of the gods. To counteract these malevolent powers, the
Shamans or medicine men are sought in times of distress because they
are the workers in “good magic,” and hence are healers. Consequently
the _materia medica_ of the Indian is fetishistic, and even when ‘real
medicine’ is taken by a sick person, magic and fetish medicine are
invariably added. Mrs. Stevenson[222] says that

    only upon acquaintance with secret cult societies can one glean
    something of the Indian’s conception of disease, its cause and
    cure. Sometimes the Shamans inherit their office but usually
    it was because of their having acquired supernatural powers
    after a long process of self isolation till a supreme gift was
    bestowed in a vision of greater import than that vouchsafed to
    ordinary mortals. Training in use of medicine or surgery is
    no part of their novitiate. The distinction between religion
    and magic is a very subtle one, and one not always easy to
    determine, because there may be wide divergence between the
    common belief of the “lay Indian” and that of the Shaman who is
    “possessed” by his conviction of supernatural experience and
    powers.[223]

While animism, in the broadest sense of that term, was universal in the
beliefs of the New World, and to this day the greater part of their
religious culture bequeathed to them from dim prehistoric time is
preserved and accepted as the rule of daily life, there is nevertheless
something so abstract, so lofty and poetic in the Indian absorption in
pure spirit that his religion becomes elusive and must be sympathetically
felt by us rather than arbitrarily expressed.

Religion has never been separated in primitive civilizations from the

    corporate life of the community, and the most essential and
    uninterrupted element in life values is the association of
    those values with spirits. Hence the religion of such a
    primitive people as the North American Indian has sprung from
    the relation of the spirits to the life values of man, and not
    from man’s relation to the outer world.[224]

A deeply ingrained tenderness for children, the poetry of a race
sensitive to all natural phenomena, the awe born of a consciousness
of the mystery and the sorrows of every human life, and the need of
something not ourselves, something higher and more helpful than anything
earth can give, is the essence of Indian religion, as it is of all our
humanity. The Indian worship of spirit is silent and solitary, in temples
not made with hands, where all-embracing Nature herself dwells in forest
silences, or on heights where sun and wind alone abide. How mistaken and
purblind was the assumption of the European that, because these primitive
people had not his particular belief, the religion that served them as
its substitute was worse than none at all, whereas actually there was
within it the elements of the most developed faith—that awe of which
Henry Dwight Sedgwick in his “Life of Marcus Aurelius” writes: “Among the
qualities that go to make up character a sensitiveness to the feeling of
awe is the surest sign of the higher life. It lies deeper than other
susceptibilities, sensuous or spiritual.”

While allowing that the Indian always was and is to-day a pagan, and that
his worship of the countless manifestations of nature must be called
superstition, let us admit that this worship is, nevertheless, the honest
faith of men who “look not beyond the evidence of the senses,” of which
its unquenched and never-to-be quenched altar fire is the eternal symbol,
to many a serious student a holier thing than priest-made creeds.




Chapter XVI

CEREMONIALS AND RITUALS

    The Pueblo peoples, ancient and modern, grew up under a hard
    environment; shadowed ever by the specters of famine and
    thirst, they were exceptionally impressed by the potencies of
    pitiless nature and the impotency of their own puny power;
    and, like other risk-haunted folk generally, they developed an
    elaborate system of ceremonies and symbols designed to placate
    the mysterious powers.—J. W. POWELL.


The three motives which lie at the bottom of Pueblo Indian ceremonies
(quite wrongly miscalled dances by American onlookers) are: the desire
for rain, which brings fertility and hence abundant crops; for the cure
of illnesses, more often in case of epidemic disease; for success in
war. How natural are these desires may be judged from the first of them,
by anyone who has travelled even a little in Arizona or New Mexico, and
who will certainly reëcho in his own heart the prayer for rain. To drive
along a shadeless road and notice on the one side green stretches of corn
or of alfalfa, while on the other are nothing but desert wastes in which
cactus and sage alone can live, is the most graphic object lesson of what
a moderate supply of water achieves. I recall a region near Bernalillo
(the Tiguex of Coronado) where a pitiful bunch of cattle was staggering
over a great area, on which not even a blade of parched grass could be
seen, while a dry arroyo tantalized them with a suggestion of where water
ought to be. On the other side of that sterile ditch were other cattle
and horses, plump and glossy, wading deep in luscious herbage. Such an
experience gives one sympathy for a people who recognize in water the
nourisher of all life, and who adore the spirits that live in fountains,
lakes, and rivers. But much sympathy will hardly help us to interpret
the ordered form of any ceremonial we may be allowed to watch. If it
is borne in mind, however, that every Pueblo ritual, however named, is
fundamentally a prayer for rain, since without water there can be no
increase of life, all observation and study will be simplified.

The staple food of the Indians, in this infertile land, is maize, which,
because it was so preëminently their staff of life, is universally known
as “Indian corn.” It does not suffer from the long, dry summers, and
requires almost no care. Bancroft writes of it:

    The maize springs luxuriantly from a warm, new field, and in
    the rich soil, with little aid from culture, outstrips the
    weeds; bears, not thirty, not fifty, but a thousand fold; if
    once dry, is hurt neither by heat nor cold; may be preserved
    in a pit or a cave for years, and for centuries; is gathered
    from the field by the hand, without knife or reaping hook; and
    becomes nutritious food by a simple roasting before a fire.[225]

No wonder, then, that corn dances figured equally with the snake dances
as prayers for rain, throughout the Indian country.[226] This cult was
further developed by a selection of colors to harmonize with the six
regions of the world. Since the colors for direction as given by Mrs.
Stevenson for Zuñi agree with the names of the original Corn clans of
Ácoma, I venture to use her designation:

    yellow for the north, blue for the west, red for the south,
    white for the east, variegated for the zenith, and black
    for the nadir. White corn is intensely white and there are
    remarkable varieties of the variegated as well as several
    shades of purple and of black corn. The same colors are found
    in the beans, which are grown in the cornfield.[227]

The visitor will see in every home neat piles of the corn in all these
colors.

All authorities are agreed that North American ceremonialism reached its
apogee in the southwestern Indian, and that the hopelessness of getting
any one of them to unravel for the American its inner significance is
profound. Yet the rites, far more than traditions or myths, will, if ever
fathomed, probably be found to hold the key to their beliefs and to the
secret of their daily life.

Alexander classifies the rites as follows:

1. The smoke offering, constituting a kind of ritualistic definition of
the Indian’s cosmos.

2. The sweat-bath or purification, which is likewise the spiritual aspect
of a healing rite.

3. Fasts and vigils for inducing visions.

4. Shamanistic rites that may inspire and possess the human agent of
divinity.

5. Communal ceremonies or “dances,” of which the white visitor never sees
the sacred and probably most significant part, but only their dramatic
expression. For example: eight days of most secret and exhausting
ceremony precede the snake dance, which the white man may witness as a
spectacle, just as in a theatre, on the ninth day.

6. The ceremonial rites in honor of the ancestral dead, or of those more
recently departed whose good-will and active help are desired.[228]

This custom suggests to the student of comparative rituals the Parentalia
of the Roman religion, not of course a conscious correlation, but
the common instinct of very unlike races to honor or appease their
forefathers. It may add interest to state also Kroeber’s conviction that
the so-called ancestor worship among the Pueblos bears not the slightest
relation to that of the eastern Asiatic belief. If we translate the
K’at’sina cult as of the “ancients,” we must understand by that word the
dead of all time, including those of last year.

    It is the dead as a generality that are prayed to by the tribe
    rather than the individual departed. If there are two systems
    of beliefs and feelings about the ancestral dead that in some
    respects are as far asunder as the poles it is those of the
    Chinese and the Pueblo dead.

He who can sympathetically understand the import of an Indian ceremonial
will alone solve the mystery of what has been bequeathed by immemorial
ancestors and of what reigns supreme to-day. To guard their ritual is the
jealous care of the older generation. Not only is secrecy imposed by the
ruler of their fraternities, but it is in fact their last weapon, whether
of defence or of revenge, against the unwarrantable abuse of power and
privilege which white over-lordship has wielded over its so-called
“wards.” It is as if the Indian said:

    You have taken our lands and our freedom of self-government;
    you have forced upon us gods we neither understand nor love,
    and an education that teaches us we may deceive and later be
    absolved. Nothing is left us but our antique heritage of ritual
    and that we will keep inviolate though we lose our lives.

One who has lived long among them told the writer that he had learned
most from watching and listening to some old men who had come to look
at a symbolic design made by a young Indian artist. For a while there
was silence; then one man began to point out certain things, then
another and another spoke, adding details, forgetful of their white
friend silent in the background, till a long and complex tale had been
quite unconsciously revealed to the listener. A familiarity born of
years of sympathetic study of their traditions and folk-lore must be
acquired before anyone can dare say he sees the deeper significance of
their ceremonials. Like the dances of all primitive races, those of the
Pueblos are essentially religio-sociologic in character, and present very
subtle intricacies. Nothing “happens.” Everything is started by some
personal agency, and everything has sex, and all is dramaturgic.[229] Dr.
Fewkes is unquestionably right in saying that “the explanation of these
observances, while the most fascinating and most valuable study, is most
liable to error.”[230] “Back of every Indian ceremony is a story, and for
every possible adventure of tribal life” there are tales and songs which
are a part of daily existence, but which are especially celebrated by
the festal “dances.” It follows that the Indian religion is a dramatic
one, full of action and color that express to the lay mind hidden truths,
just as in early Christian days the painted story on church walls was a
picture Bible for those who could not read.

[Illustration: THE INHERITED DANCE COSTUME

_Fr. O’Sullivan_]

Mary Austin says that most songs are for “occasions,” and that so blended
are movement, melody, and the muffled beat of the _tombé_ that “the
Indian will say indifferently, ‘I cannot sing that dance,’ or ‘I cannot
dance that song.’ They are as much mingled as the water of a river with
its own ripples and its rate of flowing.”[231]

There are various aids to all ceremonies, such as the sprinkling of the
sacred meal, and the use of pollen in prescribed ways. The ceremonial
pollen is gathered from hundreds of plants according to very rigid rules.
But the chief method of bringing man into harmonious relations with
“those above” is through fasting,[232] self-castigation, and prayer, a
discipline followed by bodily purification. The well-being of man is
so dependent upon water that its use, both actual and emblematic, was
apparently made in very early days an established part of all religious
ceremonies. Perhaps nothing more amazed the Christian missionaries than
to find the Indian, in order to free himself from sin and make himself
fit to appeal to his gods, using the rite of sprinkling the face and head
with medicine water, very closely akin to “holy baptism.” The weekly
sweat-bath, the frequent head-washing with soapsuds made from yucca
roots, and the purging induced by emetics are strictly enforced before
or after almost every ritual, and have probably been a prime source of
physical healthfulness in the pueblos.[233]

It follows that the lustration of snakes at Hopi before the snake dance
is a logical part of that ceremony, for the snakes are the “elder
brothers” of their clan, and since they are brought in from the field,
covered with dust, their cleansing is an essential preliminary to their
totemistic share in the dance. After taking the snakes back to the
fields, the men on their return to the pueblo go through the vomiting, or
inward purification, before sharing the feast that ends the ceremony of
several days.

There are ceremonial hunts, as well as those for the gaining of essential
food, and the races at their _fiestas_ were not merely an expression
of athletic prowess or primarily a struggle for individual supremacy.
Indeed, the adult Indian seems to do nothing purely for fun.

Since Ácoma has succeeded better than most of the pueblos in preserving
her ancient way of life, it is far more difficult to penetrate her ritual
than that of any other. We are told by Lummis of the impression, at the
time of the great festival, of a mystery in the surrounding air—of an
alert anticipation or watchfulness for magic, good or evil—and how in
hidden crannies of her most inaccessible cliff one may find plume sticks,
because “the feathers of the eagle’s breast symbolize to the natives
that, as the eagle soars by means of these feathers into the very eye of
the sun, so may their prayers ascend to the sacred precincts of ‘Those
Above.’”

We know of three important ritual celebrations at Ácoma: namely, the
Fiesta of San Estévan, patron saint of the mission and now of the pueblo,
on September 2; that of All Souls’ Day; and the winter solstice rites,
commingled with Christmas. A fourth that occurs at the time of the summer
solstice, on San Juan’s Day, June 24, is in most pueblos an occasion of
serious and elaborate ritual, but at Ácoma it is so much more like a
madcap race and game that it is described in the chapter on games. All
festivities are announced by the town crier some days in advance. It is
worth noting that, though the days for both of the solstice ceremonials
are appointed by the head _cheani_, called together by the war captains,
it is evident that they are determined by the observation of the sun’s
“turning back” in June, from which moment six moons are counted. In fact,
the only reckoning of time is by the moons from solstice to solstice. In
some tribes each month has its poetic name, derived from the appearance
of the moon.

Of all investigators, the one who has best succeeded in giving us
some hints about their present ritual customs and beliefs is Dr.
Parsons.[234] All who are interested in making more than the most
superficial acquaintance with Ácoma rituals should consult her printed
articles.[235] Professor Espinosa has also collected a valuable number
of folk-tales and anthropological data. To these two sources the writer
acknowledges her great indebtedness for the facts given in this section
of the study. Dr. Parsons went to Ácoma in January, 1917, accompanied
by a native Zuñi who knew her well and who had relatives at Ácoma. Even
with such an introduction, and though she was hospitably entertained by
an Ácoma household, she had “to contend against extreme distrust of the
whites,” and with much difficulty finally differentiated herself from
“the ordinary picture-taking tourist.” But their special aversion was to
any representative of the national government “from whom every ceremonial
or detail of life is to be hidden.” So that even after they had begun
to trust Dr. Parsons, the story-teller of the moment would break off
suddenly at a critical point to be reassured that none of what he had
said would be forwarded to Washington. Of a second visit in 1918, Dr.
Parsons says, by way of preface, that “information is so difficult to get
that, fragmentary as it is, it should be presented,” both for its own
value and because the only way to learn something from the Pueblo Indian
is to know something beforehand.

Before mentioning the public ceremonials, it is well to note in passing
certain individual rites, classed as “crisis ceremonialism,”[236] by
which is understood the transition from one stage of life to another.
Birth, adolescence, the initiation into fraternities, marriage, funeral
and mourning, each has its ordered recognition by definite rituals.
One not shared by white people, called “ceremonial friendship,” is a
beautiful relation between two persons who have become fast friends
but have no kinship of blood. Always a voluntary choice, it may begin
in very early childhood, or at any later period; it is most frequently
seen between two men, much more rarely between two women, and not seldom
between a man and a woman. In the last case, it constitutes a relation
of brother and sister with no possibility of marriage, nor would either
dream of marrying into the clan of the other. _Saukin_ is the Ácoma word
for friend. In Zuñi these friends are called _kihe_, and there is a
solemn ceremony performed to consummate it. Dr. Parsons could not be sure
of the same custom at Ácoma, but she saw a woman make a present of a bowl
to a Zuñi visitor to whom she had previously given a meal. “We are now
friends,” said the Ácoma woman—although Zuñi claims never to make _kihe_
with other pueblos.

Espéjo in 1580 mentioned the snake dance at Ácoma, but did not say
anything about the snakes being carried in the mouth as at Walpi, which
is so extraordinary a sight that he could hardly have overlooked it; and
Mrs. M. C. Stevenson[237] in her vivid and important account of the snake
ceremony of the Queres pueblo at Sía, expressly says that the Sía priests
held the snakes in their hands. The Hopi, in fact, assert that the Queres
never have put the serpents in their mouths, as they themselves do. In
1895 several Snake and Antelope priests at Hopi told Fewkes that portions
of the snake ceremonial still survived at Ácoma, but he could not confirm
this from anyone acquainted with Ácoma rituals.[238] In 1918, according
to Dr. Parsons, there was but one Snake clansman left at Ácoma, and I
was told in 1922 that he had since died. On September 2, the feast day
of the patron saint of Ácoma, a dramatic representation is given of the
coming of St. Stephen to New Mexico.[239] Visitors are apparently made
more welcome at this time than at any other during the year. The church
is wide open for prayers in early morning, and then there follows a
religious service. After this comes the drama, and then a long programme
of dances, foot races, and other games.[240] The ceremony is chiefly
pagan but here, as everywhere in the Indian country, the name of the
saint is given whose day coincides in the Christian calendar with that of
the ancient _fiesta_—another adroit adaptation of the early padres.

[Illustration: ÁCOMA ON FEAST-DAY OF ST. STEPHEN

SEPTEMBER 2

_Fr. O’Sullivan_]

The celebration of All Souls’ Day at Ácoma and Laguna is unquestionably
an inheritance of early Catholic training, albeit at Zuñi Dr. Parsons was
told that it was a ritual of their own race, and not one engrafted from
any other. At nightfall in Ácoma on November 1 or 2[241] the informant
of Dr. Parsons “guessed” that parties of possibly as many as ten boys
go about the streets calling out “_Tsalemo, Salemo_,” at the same time
ringing a bell. This custom, according to Professor Espinosa, is a purely
Spanish one, and the words used as they beg for food are an Indian
corruption of the first words of an “invocation undoubtedly taught their
ancestors by Spanish padres: ‘_Tsalemo, Saremo, Oremo, Soremo._’”[242]
The boys are given food, and other food is taken to the cemetery and
placed at the foot of the wooden cross standing there, near which the
war chiefs are on guard. By next morning all the food has disappeared.
Dr. Parsons[243] speaks of the “Mexican prayer: _Padre Spirito Santo_,
Amen” as part of the celebration, but, according to Professor Espinosa,
“these Indian vocables are regular phonetic developments of the first
three words of the Catholic ceremony: _por la señal_.” The current
familiar pronunciation is _pol la seña_. Professor Espinosa gives the
whole prayer as the Indian mumbles it, with the Spanish words below, as
follows:

    _Polasenyá_       _ela Santa_         _kulusi_    _lenuishta_
    _Por la señal_    _de la santa_       _Cruz_      _de nuestros_

    _inimiku_         _liplansiniola_     _ios_       _inimipali_
    _enemigos_        _libranos señor_    _Dios_      _en nombre el padre_

    _eleho_           _eleshpintu_        _Santu_     _amikiasusi_
    _del hijo_        _y el espirítu_     _Santo_     _Amén Jesús_

The celebration in December is longer, and in certain respects more
elaborate, than either of the others, though it is less like a pageant
than the _fiesta_ of St. Stephen, and, as has been said elsewhere,
it is a curious complex of pagan and Christian customs. The whole
celebration is known in Mexican as _fiesta del Re_, but in Keresan it is
_Koachansiwatsask_. It is preceded by the warrior dance called _hoinawe_.
Dr. Parsons was not allowed to witness the preparation of the songs
composed for the occasion, which took place in the estufas. The men were
summoned to the dance by officers, who walked through the three avenues,
crying out their summons.

    Four Circuits are made, one officer following another through
    “North Row”; “Middle Row”; and “Last Row,” for the custom
    characteristic of other pueblos of calling out the orders from
    the house-top is not found in Ácoma.

Beginning on December 16, the church bell is rung every morning at nine
o’clock, and mass is said by the _sextana_. Everyone counts the days
until the 22nd when there is a grand rehearsal of the dances at night in
the clan house of the Sun. From then until the 30th there are continual
dances and exchanges of gifts. On Christmas day the so-called “Comanche
dance,” in which costumes like those of that once-dreaded enemy are worn,
takes place in the church at the foot of the altar. This dance must be of
Spanish origin, for a similar ceremony takes place in Seville cathedral
before the altar on December 8 for the celebration of the Immaculate
Conception, and again at the Feast of Corpus Christi. The open plaza
called _Kakati_, where a cross-street runs from North Row to Middle Row,
supplies the stage for all outdoor dances. No whites are allowed to see
the masked dances at Ácoma or Laguna, although these take place in the
open plaza. The dance Dr. Parsons did see was maskless, to celebrate the
installation of officers, and was called “unfinished.”[244]

From the 26th to the 29th, Comanche dances in which children may take
part are frequent in the plaza. The _Kachale_ come out, and there is the
_pasku_, or butterfly dance. Meanwhile, the _Kasik_ and his “brothers”
and “uncles,” that is, the younger and older members of the Antelope
clan, meet in their house a group of ten, probably the _principales_.
(This house was back of the _estufas_, and Dr. Parsons did not ascertain
whether it was the clan house or a ceremonial house.) Here was held the
discussion about the men eligible for election on the following day, when
all the men meet in the _Komanina_ (a long house near the church, where
the officers hold court).[245] So anxious was Dr. Parsons’s host to have
her leave town at a certain time, before the dances were finished, that
she felt sure there was some ritual too sacred for her profane eyes.

This merely suggestive sketch of the ceremonials which are to the Indian
the most intimately important occupation of his life may be closed with a
summary by Mrs. Stevenson, who says:

    Their sociology and religion are so intricately woven together
    that the study of one can not be pursued without the other, the
    ritual beginning at birth and closing at death. Their religion
    is not one mainly of propitiation but rather of supplication
    for favor and payment of the same, and to do the will of the
    beings to whom they pray. This is the paramount occupation
    of their life. All other desirable things come through its
    practice.[246]

[Illustration: PROCESSION OF THE DANCERS, ÁCOMA

_Fr. O’Sullivan_]

When, therefore, the Christian missionaries made the astounding and
appalling announcement to the native dwellers that they were under the
awful doom of eternal punishment, they aroused, by adding a supernatural
terror, a superhuman determination in the breast of the Indian to rid his
land forever of the blasphemous invaders. When this proved impossible to
effect by force of arms, they apparently yielded to “conversion,” but
only to cherish the more sacredly their old rites and beliefs, so that,
gradually fusing the two more or less, they have to-day an inextricable
complex of ritual.

What does the American government think it is likely to gain by a
suppression of these moral and social laws, with their ancestry of
centuries?

    NOTE.—While this chapter was in proof, there came to hand
    _Manito Masks_, by Hartley Alexander. This small volume gives
    a subtle and illuminating epitome of “the three key-forms of
    Indian aesthetic—Rhythm, Song and Spectacle.” From these,
    in combination with subordinate _motifs_, the Indian weaves
    his symbolic and dramatic ritual wherein is depicted all the
    mystery of man’s life and death.




Chapter XVII

INDIAN GAMES

    While the common and secular object of the games of the North
    American Indians appears to be purely a manifestation of the
    desire for amusement or gain, they are performed also as
    religious ceremonies, as rites pleasing to the gods to secure
    their favor, or as processes of sympathetic magic to drive away
    sickness, avert evil, or to produce rain and the fertilization
    and reproduction of plants and animals.—CULIN.


The subject of games will be treated here only as one aspect of the
sociologic interpretation of Indian life. Not to mention games would be
to ignore an important element of youthful training and of adult life
in every pueblo. Yet the subject is difficult to make vivid, unless one
has watched the special sport described. Mr. Stewart Culin, to whom we
owe most of our knowledge of Indian games, and to whose work I wish here
to acknowledge great indebtedness, has given us a monograph profusely
illustrated. To it,[247] and to the many museum collections of the
implements employed in Indian sports, the especially interested reader
must go for more than a superficial acquaintance with them.

All Indians are so devoted to games and gaming that the familiar
sobriquet of “inveterate gambler” is well deserved. But the sport to
which they are most addicted is not, as is popularly supposed, the
playing of cards. That is a vice which the Indian has learned from his
white conquerors and which has proved so baneful that it is now forbidden
under rather heavy penalties by the agents on all the reservations.
It so happens that cards and “nine-men’s morris” are two of the very
few games the Indian ever borrowed from the white man. These are well
balanced by lacrosse and racket, which are the gifts of the Indian to
the white man. Games of all kinds, often quite trivial in appearance,
are played persistently by both men and women, apparently as a mere
pastime, regardless of the wager involved; but one can be pretty certain
that there is hardly any daily pursuit whose enjoyment for the Indian
is not enhanced by some stake. Also it is not to be forgotten that to
every individual of the race, the underlying religious significance
of almost all the games he plays constitutes an important factor in
his development, and practically all of them, when carefully studied,
are found to be so intimately interwoven with religious beliefs and
practices that Indian games may be said generally to possess a devotional
significance. It is probable that some of the games have a divinatory
meaning. Consequently, though betting is the commonest detail of every
day, the Indian’s real absorption is usually in the game itself rather
than in the stake involved.

Since, in general, the great games are played ceremonially to secure
fertility, to give life and prolong it, to expel demons, or to cure
sickness, these are all sure to come at the seasonal periods of planting
and of harvest, or in especial times of disaster to individuals or
communities.

Such races as those still run at Ácoma and at Zuñi are visible proof
that the physical vigor characteristic of the Pueblo tribes in days of
old has not vanished. The invading Spaniards were not seldom amazed by
the indomitable courage of the Indians in facing hardships and their
endurance of cruel suffering without blenching. The stoicism with which
they bear wounds with no outcry is not achieved without much discipline,
and the Indian from his childhood is no stranger to pain. The early
morning programme of an Indian of one of the northern tribes may be taken
as typical of all:

    He would bathe, rub himself down with hemlock branches till
    the skin tingled with pain, pray to the sky chief and, most
    important of all, carry out secret magical performances.

Games to develop the muscles, to strengthen the whole frame, and inure it
to arrow wounds are the constant occupation of the growing lad, and when
he kills his first rabbit or catches a woodpecker with his hands, his
father will proudly celebrate the event by a “smoke” or a feast. Until
a boy is admitted to the hunt, and later to the rank of warrior, there
is no cessation to the disciplinary training, even though much of it is
given under the guise of play.

The normal routine of a youth, in the process of hardening himself to
become even as skilful and as strong as the average of his companions,
seems to us an extraordinary procedure. Withdrawal to the silences of the
woods or the cliffs for a more or less variable length of time was, and
still may be, exacted at the age of puberty, with fasting and continence
also rigidly enjoined. Fasting, learned by degrees, makes the long fasts
required later for ritual purposes more easy, and it has developed the
capacity of the desert tribes to live for long periods upon an incredibly
meagre diet in seasons of drought and the failure of crops. Young men who
seek to gain power and to win the highest reward within the gift of their
tribe, office in the esoteric priesthoods, add to the ordinary discipline
rigors of which we can have little comprehension. They whip themselves
into states of ecstasy, seeing visions in consequence, and receiving aid
from supernatural powers to counteract the mischief-working beings who
live, as they believe, in plants or beasts, or even in certain men and
women. Then they return to the pueblo with the far-away gaze in their
eyes of those who see not as other men see, and it is understood by all
that they have been favored of the gods and are “not as other men are.”

Culin divides all Indian games, including racing, into the two classes
of games of chance and games of dexterity. Games requiring the kind
of intellectual calculation and skill that chess demands seem never
to occur. The aboriginal legend tells us that Iyatiko, the Mother,
invented all games, and that many of them, such as the one called
“chuck-away-grains,” were brought from Si-pa-pu, in the first migration.
Culin also believes that all Indian games are native to these people and
contain no modifications due to white influence other than the common
degeneration which characterizes all Indian institutions tainted from the
same source. Again, he emphasizes

    a well-marked affinity between the same games [played by] the
    most widely separated tribes, [their variations being] due to
    the materials employed rather than in the object or method of
    play. In general the variations do not follow difference in
    language.

Culin says that the implements used in games are almost universally
derived from the symbolic weapons of the mythic Twins: for example, the
various sticks used in stick games are either miniature bows, or arrows,
and the painted tubes used in guessing games are arrow shafts. Racket may
be referred to the netted shield of the war gods, and is played only by
men.

The games of chance are of two sorts: those in which the implements are
either something in the nature of disks thrown at random to determine a
number or numbers, with the count kept either by pebbles, or by sticks,
or upon a counting board, the gain or loss depending upon the priority
in which the players arrived at a definite goal; and those where the
players guess in which of two or more places a particularly marked lot is
concealed, success or failure resulting in the loss or gain of counters.

Games of dexterity include many modifications of archery, sliding
javelins or darts upon the hard ground or ice, shooting at a moving
target formed of a netted wheel or ring; ball, in several highly
complicated forms, and racing games more or less related to and
complicated with ball games.

A game known as the ball race appears only among the Indians of the
Southwest, including Mexico and California, and is in season only from
March until May, as an appeal for rain. In this sport the ball may be
of stone or of wood. At Ácoma it is a game between the war captains,
and, as among other Keres tribes, it is not played with balls but with
two billets of wood.[248] The winning stick is buried in a cornfield.
At Zuñi[249] the ball race is the great tribal game, which, since it
comes when the men have finished the planting, has also the ceremonial
character of a prayer for rain to fertilize the freshly sown fields.
There is no more exciting event in the whole year at Zuñi. Starting upon
the pueblo, the men race across to To-a-ya-lana (Thunder Mountain), their
holiest shrine, then for two miles or more along its base and back to the
pueblo. Often the racers are followed by as many as two or three hundred
persons on horseback closely watching to see whether they are losing or
gaining the stakes they have ventured. These wagers have been known to
include all the possessions of a man, even his wife; for that matter, the
women become as excited as the men and their betting is quite as heavy.
Shinny, which may be played only in the autumn, is commonly played by
women only, and this is also true of double-ball. The writer saw the
girls of Taos playing at this latter game most gracefully and tirelessly
upon the upper terraces of the north pueblo. Every writer speaks of the
Indian as the most graceful loser in the world, so he at once enlists our
sympathetic attention. Ácoma’s great spectacular game is the Gallo Race
on San Juan’s Day, June 24. Some form of this game is found everywhere
in New Mexico, among the people of Spanish descent, as well as among the
Indians, but the two races play it with a difference.

Lummis,[250] who makes a picturesque story of it as seen at Ácoma, says
that he has

    never known a Pueblo Indian to lose his temper in that wild
    fight. He gives and takes like a man, strains every fibre of
    his being to win but never thinks of harboring a vindictive
    thought. In temper as in endurance and skill he is the model
    player. The Mexicans rarely finish without bad blood or even
    bloodshed.

At Ácoma, the starting-point is at the foot of the great mesa. Two old
men go out to a level spot at the foot of one of the buttes and plant a
cock in the sand so that only his head and perhaps two inches of neck
can be seen. In 1922, I was told that an unusual number of entries were
made, and that men started on the top of the Rock in a foot-race and
mounted the horses at the bottom, while running full speed, to catch
the fowl and carry it off—“a great race,” said my Indian informant,
laughing immoderately at the recollection. The victor is pursued by all
the others, who tear off bits of feathers and claws or whatever they can
secure. The struggle often lasts as much as four hours, the tireless
horses and riders, of surpassing agility and endurance, tearing over “the
broad plain, hither and yon through rock-walled passes, up and over steep
ridges of knee-deep sand, rider and horse alike unrecognizable for foam
and dust in their wild career.”

Among the games of dexterity played at Ácoma, Culin mentions the shooting
of arrows at bundles of tied-up grass as the only variety of archery
pursued.

A specialty of the Ácomas which they regard as their original possession,
though it is also played at Zuñi, is a game called _bish-i_. The
tradition is that the greatest of all legendary gamblers, Gau-pot, played
this game against the sun, was defeated, and became blind. The implements
are four pieces of hollow cane split longitudinally, each five or six
inches long. Before the canes are thrown, the players breathe upon them,
and so great is the sacredness of the game that no women may ever touch
the canes. The playing of this game is confined to the winter season in
the _kivas_, where a society called _Bish-i_ is devoted to its cult.

As has been said in another connection, the adult Indian appears seldom
to do anything purely for fun. Almost the only games indulged in for
mere amusement, as we play them, are the simple ones of the children,
who, like children everywhere, play at the occupations of their elders.
Imitative warfare, however, is not confined to these men of smaller
growth, with their bows and arrows.[251] Cat’s cradle, which we think of
as a childish amusement but which is played by adults the world around,
is regarded by most authorities as being without religious significance.
But, as Culin says,[252] it is known by “every tribe of whom direct
enquiry was made,” and the Zuñis believe that this string-game was
taught by the Spider Woman to the war gods for their netted shields.
The distinguished English anthropologist, Dr. Alfred Haddon, and his
daughter collected several hundred forms of cat’s cradle among the South
Sea Islanders, and on their way back to England lingered in Arizona,
where, with Dr. Alfred Tozzer’s help, they identified more than a dozen
varieties of the game among the Navajos, some of which appeared to have
a ritualistic significance. Mr. Culin was told by Dr. Bernard Haile of
St. Michael, Arizona, that the Navajos have a legend to the effect that
the holy spiders taught them how to make the numerous figures of stars,
bears, coyotes, snakes, and so forth, on the solemn condition that the
game should be played in winter only, because then snakes and spiders are
asleep and cannot see them. Certain death was sure to overtake anyone
playing at any other season. But Dr. Haile could not discover any deeper
religious use or meaning.

To conclude: games, like every other aspect and detail of the Indian
community, are socio-religious in essence, and hark back in many tribes
to their origin myths. Here we find the description of a

    series of contests in which the demiurge—first man, culture
    hero—overcomes some foe of the human race by exercise of
    superior cunning, skill or magic. [The primal gamblers seem
    always to have been] the divine Twins, miraculous offspring
    of the Sun, who live in the East and West, who rule night
    and day; summer and winter. They are the morning and evening
    stars. Their virgin mother, who appears also as sister and
    wife, is constantly spoken of as their grandmother, and is the
    Moon or the Earth, or the Spider Woman, the embodiment of the
    feminine principle in Nature. Always contending, they are the
    principal patrons of play and their games are the games now
    played by men.[253] [Such a condition of mind almost justifies
    Bandelier’s strong statement that] the Indian with all his
    democratic institutions, in society as in religion is the
    merest slave. His life is the best exemplification of what a
    many-headed tyranny can achieve. Every step is controlled by
    religious fear.[254]




Chapter XVIII

POTTERY

    At the period of discovery, art, at a number of places on the
    American Continent, seems to have been developing surely and
    steadily through the force of the innate genius of the race,
    and the more advanced nations were already approaching the
    threshold of Civilization. Their methods were characterized by
    great simplicity and their art products are, as a consequence,
    exceptionally homogeneous. The advent of European civilization
    checked the current of growth, and new and conflicting
    elements were introduced necessarily disastrous to the native
    development. By supplementing the study of the prehistoric by
    that of historic art, we may hope to penetrate deeply into the
    secrets of the past.—WILLIAM H. HOLMES.


Since the Ácoma potters are justly famous, a brief discussion of the
ceramic art as practised by the Pueblo peoples is here introduced. In
the determination of areas of material culture on the western continent,
the cultivation of maize is particularly significant and widespread.
Coextensive with maize growing is found some form of pottery. Since
botanical evidence makes certain that the art of maize cultivation arose
south of the Rio Grande,[255] we are safe in assuming that the art of
pottery also originated beyond that region.

[Illustration: ÁCOMA GIRL RETURNING FROM THE RESERVOIR

THE PLAIN STRETCHES IMMEASURABLY FAR TO THE MOUNTAIN HORIZON

_Bolton_]

No account of Indian civilization can be attempted without some mention,
however brief, of an art through which much of the development and
kinship of the tribes may be traced. The sketch which I shall attempt to
make here is largely based on the laborious and distinguished researches
of Mr. F. H. Cushing and Dr. W. H. Holmes, which are to be found for
the most part in the “Annual Reports” of the Bureau of Ethnology. It is
regrettable that such valuable aids to study are not accessible in other
form. The study of the pottery of the prehistoric pueblos, as I have
said, furnishes one of the best clues to their inter-relationships, and
the first idea of students was that it must also throw much light upon
their racial origins. Further investigation, however, taught that

    the laws which govern the migration of races do not regulate
    the distribution of the arts. Not only do the arts follow a
    pathway of their own, but one which often conflicts with that
    of race-migration. They pass from place to place or from people
    to people by a process of acculturation, so that peoples of
    unlike origin practise like arts, while those of like origin,
    are found practising unlike arts.[256]

At the period of their discovery by Spain the Village Indians were living
in the stone age, and they used, for the most part, stone tools; their
religious symbols are therefore found on axes and knives as well as on
pottery, or interwoven in baskets and blankets.

There are three groups of pottery accepted as existing in North America
in the pre-Columbian era. These are the crude stone implements of the
nomadic tribes of the Atlantic coast, the earthenware vessels found in
the mounds of the Mississippi Valley, and the advanced ceramics of the
Pueblo peoples in the Southwest. Though we cannot here discuss the first
two varieties, it is worth while, in passing, to note that the Mound
Builders left behind them a vast number of pipes for smoking. These
were made from a single piece of the hardest procurable stone carved
to represent certain birds and animals. Moreover, their pipe sculpture
betrays an art so superior to all else that they did that it makes
evident how great an importance was probably attached to these pipes.

Smoking is an essential preliminary to, and element of, every ritual.
Hence it follows, naturally enough, that

    no one institution, for so it may be called, was more firmly
    fixed by long usage among the North American Indians, or more
    characteristic of them than the pipe in all its varied uses and
    significances.[257]

In the arid regions of the Southwest, water was so precious a commodity
that the Pueblo peoples very early acquired skill in making receptacles
for its transport and conservation and became, as Powell says, “the
potters _par excellence_ of aboriginal America.” Just as the first
incentive toward the art of pottery grew out of the need of utensils for
the preparation of foods, so to-day it is the most general and important
motive for its creation. Profoundly influenced by the earlier art of
basketry, pottery is always found in close relationship with its sister
art wherever the two industries occur together. The nomad tribes would
naturally prefer the basket because so much more easily transported from
place to place, and they showed extraordinary skill in making cooking
vessels of wicker that are not only water-tight but are of such beauty
that they are to-day accounted almost priceless by collectors.

Of the more advanced pottery, Dr. Boas says, that of the Rio Grande
pueblos was “a good deal behind the Peruvians artistically but second
to none mechanically.” The Pueblo people have always dwelt in a land
of cañons and high plateaus, rising from great stretches of sand that
touch at last the far blue horizon. Here they were provided by nature
with an inexhaustible supply of material suitable for pottery. Clay of
a consistency perfectly adapted for this purpose is left by the sudden
storms that wash through the deep arroyos and deposit therein a valuable
sediment. The self-taught potters were not long in learning through
experience just what admixture of sand would make this clay malleable and
more durable. The colors of the stratified sandstone and clay taught them
harmony as well as contrast, and the ochres and other mineral deposits
provided them with the pigments they desired for the varied decoration
of their jars. Thus was built up an art and a culture which deserves our
admiration and should forever set at rest the careless assumption that
the original Americans were a savage people at the time of the white
invasion.

Gradually certain vessels came to be set aside for purposes of religious
or Shamanistic ceremonials. Mortuary jars for a long time were apparently
no other than those used by the departed one in life, but eventually,
like those dedicated to other ritualistic necessities, funeral and grave
jars were differentiated and set aside as something to be especially
reverenced and never otherwise employed. Imperfect _tinajas_, or the
still larger jars intended for storage, are much used for the chimneys
of pueblo houses, being built up one upon another till the requisite
height is attained, when a coating of adobe-mortar fills in all chinks
and makes a smooth outer surface; but it is believed that this occurred
only after Spanish influence was introduced. Before this innovation
the smoke escaped through the hatchway. At first, all vessels were
probably moulded by the fingers of the potter from a lump of material;
then, copying the wicker coils of the basket-maker, the potter rolled
in the hands long ropes of clay, mobile and easy to build up spirally
into any desired form. Nothing resembling a potter’s wheel has ever
been employed in the pueblos, but a shallow foot of wicker, or a piece
of a gourd often serves as a temporary support in order that the jar
may be revolved by a touch of the artist’s fingers, without injury to
the clay coil. We find, of course, that most enviable characteristic
of all hand-work—the slight variations in modelling and in decoration
that are lost when more mechanical processes are employed. The quality
of the material varied somewhat according to the use to be made of the
jars. Those for storage, either of grain or of water, or those for
dyeing wool where weaving is a local industry, are of coarse clay and
are plainer and heavier than the small receptacles made for daily use.
After the modelling would come the question whether the irregularities of
surface were to be left ribbed or made smooth by scraping with the sharp
edge of a bit of gourd, or of a broken shard, or fragment of obsidian.
Jars are found with the roughnesses of the coils inside, and the outer
surface carefully smoothed, but the commoner practice was the reverse of
this, and indeed the Pueblo people showed at a very early stage their
love of ornament by using a great variety of devices in the spiral
coils. Thumb-nail indentations in regular patterns probably made one of
the first of such decorative adjuncts. Sometimes the coil is crimped
throughout the whole surface, and again the body of the vessel will be
smoothed and the coils left only upon the shoulder and collar. More and
more elaborate patterns, wave-like or of incised lines, or overlapping
in scale design, were invented and varied in a multitude of ways. The
next innovation was modelling in relief, and this was soon followed
by painting. Black appears to have been the first pigment discovered,
and the black-and-white pottery is considered the oldest; but it could
not be long before an artist living in a land of color would wish to
use color on the light surface of jars, and would begin to reproduce
designs familiar in natural objects. Such ornament followed closely in
the footsteps of basketry and textiles. Meander patterns and geometric
adaptations of rectilinear outlines were employed in both arts in an
infinite variety of designs.[258] Dr. Holmes thinks that very little
decoration was invented outright and that, like the forms of pottery, it
originated in copying natural objects such as the exquisite shells, whose
surfaces are “embellished with ribs, spines, nodes and colors.” “Clay,”
he says, “is so mobile it can be made to record or echo a vast deal of
nature and of co-existent art.”[259] The conch-shell may have suggested,
to the imaginative mind of the native artist, spiral forms of vessels, as
well as the convenient addition of handles, and also must have helped the
painter to adapt rectilinear lines to the curved surfaces of the jars.

Colors were always used symbolically as well as decoratively on every
kind of vessel, whatever its material. While watching a potter at Ácoma
I was interested to notice that the first delicate hair-lines around the
lip of a jar were never quite closed together. The space left was so tiny
it would not be noticed as an imperfection, and it was most illuminating
afterward to read that Cushing was told by a Zuñi woman that this little
unfilled space was “the exit trail of life and being.” Cushing goes on
to say that when at length a pot is dried, polished, and decorated,

    the potter will tell you with an air of relief that it is a
    “made being,” and her statement is confirmed as a sort of
    article of faith when you observe that as she places the vessel
    in the kiln she also places in and beside it food.[260]

This vague feeling that any and all jars have some sort of personality
is further illustrated by the belief that the noise made when a pot
is struck is the voice of the spirit within, and the louder note of a
pot when broken is similarly the cry of the spirit escaping from the
imprisoning clay.

The superstition that to close completely an ornament is unlucky must be
as widely diffused as any primitive belief, for it is a well-known fact
that, among the weavers and embroiderers and painters of Greece and the
Balkans, no design is ever quite joined. A tiny bit that does not mar the
effect is always left unfinished.

The extent and variety of ways in which the Indian depicts his idea
of the source or breath of life is vividly illustrated by Cushing in
his “Decorative Symbolism.”[261] For example, clouds or many another
“phenomenon of nature held sacred and mysterious” by the Indian are
conventionalized by the potter for decorative purposes. Thus the terraced
or stepped rim of a round bowl is the symbol of the horizon whence rise
the clouds. The painted decoration on jars conveys the same idea, and the
pendant drops from many an ornament represent the falling rain. The art
of ornament is everywhere a conservative one and depends greatly upon the
general development of culture in the nation practising it; or, as Dr.
Holmes puts it: “The character of ornamentation does not depend so much
upon the age of the art, as upon the acquirements of the potter and his
people in other arts.”

Though the work of all pueblo potters is free-hand, it is never
haphazard. The Indian friend whom we watched through a long day of work
at Ácoma had no pattern, no visible rule, nor did she measure out any
spaces for her most elaborate designs. Though she did not tell us how
many more she knew than the ten designs we saw, she did say that she knew
exactly from the starting of each what the whole would become. The brush
used is very limber, being made from two or three strands of yucca fibre
about three inches in length. With this flexible tool she adapted her
pattern to the curved surfaces, without embarrassment or erasures, and
with as little difficulty as one might have in tracing a flat drawing
in a book. It is no doubt a convenience to restrict the preparation of
colors for any one particular time, and on that day she used only black,
yellow, and brown colors.

After the decoration is completed there is the process of firing. The
chalk-white clay acquires a mellow tint, varied according to the fuel
used. Age, and especially daily use over the fire, deepen and beautify
this surface tone so that the older a jar, the more delightful is it to
possess. In the museum at Santa Fé a large case of jars, all marked as
coming from Ácoma, shows that the modern potters are using old designs,
often mingled with those believed to have originated at Sía. In earlier
days many kinds of fuel were used for the firing process, such as very
dry greasewood, sagebrush, or piñon, though wherever cannel coal was
found it was given preference. The worst method ever employed was burying
the green pot under hot ashes and encircling it with a blazing fire. The
better and more usual practice is to dig a little kiln in the ground, or,
as is perforce the only way at Ácoma, to hollow out a space in the rock.
This is lined with dried cakes of sheep dung—now the universal and almost
exclusive fuel in all pueblos. The jars are fitted into this shallow kiln
and a dome-like structure of dung is built above, after which the whole
is slowly fired. The dung is thought by the Indians to bake the ware more
evenly than the resinous woods, but Cushing thinks this fuel so inferior
that to its use in great measure can be attributed the deterioration of
modern ceramics in the pueblos. Resinous woods cannot be used where the
color is the important thing, but the

    black ware while still hot from a first firing, if coated both
    outside and in with some of the easily obtained mucilaginous
    gums, and then burned a second or third time with resinous
    wood-fuel, is rendered absolutely fireproof, semi-glazed with
    a black gloss and wonderfully durable.

No principle of true glaze is now known to the pueblo potters, but in
early days a genuine glaze was used purely for decoration. Being spread
over only a part of the surface, it added nothing toward making a jar
water-tight.

I have found no indication that the Ácomas ever followed any other art
than that of pottery, but it is quite possible this may be only their
share of the partitioning of the industries agreed upon by the pueblos
in comparatively recent time. However, since to-day the sole artistic
occupation of the Ácomas appears to be in ceramics, I have omitted, in
the consideration of Pueblo arts, both textiles and basketry. With regard
to the pottery, Dr. Fewkes says that, in the absence of more definite
insight,

    Ácoma pottery bears little resemblance to that peculiar to
    southern clans; it is distinctly Queresan, and resembles more
    closely the pottery of ancient Hopi than that of ancient Zuñi,
    or of Little Colorado ware—by which it does not seem to have
    been affected.[262]

Though the pottery of the Ácomas is less durable than that of the Zuñis,
its designs have much more variety—trees and leaves, birds and flowers,
being introduced along with geometrical patterns. There are specific
reds and grays used in the Ácoma and Zuñi pottery; and a bright green
pigment applied in circular blotches before firing, that gives something
approaching a glaze afterwards, is found at both Ácoma and Laguna.

Among those pueblos where pottery and earthenware utensils form a
conspicuous feature of their civilization, Mr. James Stevenson[263]
mentions Ácoma and the great similarity of its pottery to that of Laguna,
though the Laguna potters use more colors. He calls some of the designs
at Ácoma “very spirited.” Many of the jars in the Santa Fé museum have
combinations of Ácoma and Sía designs—the bird of each pueblo being quite
distinct.

We may briefly summarize here the value of our knowledge concerning
ceramics to the other forms of cultural development of any people and
find it applicable to the inter-relationships of those American Indians
who practised the art. Since it can never be known when the modelling
of clay was first practised, there is fascination in the suggestion
that it came in some long-past day when a man walking on clay softened
by rain noticed his own footprints. The rudest savage may well have
discovered with what ease he could fashion a crude but useful vessel from
moist earth, but the first baking of such a utensil probably occurred
through some happy accident. We know that sun-dried bricks were used in
early building, but no clay cups thus treated would have served to hold
liquids.

The student searching for some standard by which to measure the creative
attainment of a semi-civilized race has chosen as most universal the
work of the early potters, and the interesting fact is disclosed that
the first attempts in ceramics of all peoples are curiously alike in
processes, in modes of decoration, and in adaptation to practical needs.
There is in the decorative addition of painting to pottery something
much more valuable than mere ornament, namely, a conventionalized
representation, graphically expressed, of the mythology and the social
habits of a race, so that even without written records it becomes
possible for us to form a fairly clear idea of its cultural development.
In short, the study of pottery has disclosed so much of race origins that
it is now regarded as essential to an understanding of the history and
mythology, and, in many countries, of the industries no less than of the
arts, of ancient peoples.

The student of American ceramics accepts the theory prevailing to-day to
the effect that the aborigines of this continent came from Asia, not all
at once but in successive migrations, bringing with them customs and arts
from many different sources at many different times; and our hope to-day
is that the modifications brought about by the meeting and mingling
of these various migratory streams will be finally made clear through
the patient work of the experts as new ceramic “finds” are unearthed
throughout the continent.

[Illustration: THE GUARDIAN CLIFFS OF ÁCOMA

_Bolton_]




L’ENVOI


In taking our leave of the Republic of Ácoma, seated haughtily aloof
upon her stony citadel, certain reflections grow imperious. Emerging
from the shadows of legendary origins to the historic past, already a
dim and distant background, we may please our fancy with poetic and
picturesque, or heroic episodes, while recognizing that the flowing tide
of civilization has inevitably swept away some that was admirable, along
with more that was brutal and savagely impossible to retain.

The sources of Ácoma’s life story, as of other Indian communities,
are three. First, we have all that has been carefully garnered and
interpreted for us by the anthropologists. This is chiefly concerned
with pre-Columbian or pre-Spanish days. Since the American domination,
government officials and visitors to all the pueblos have added much of
value and interest. There remains an almost untouched treasure in the
vast number of records kept through nearly three centuries by Spanish
priests and chroniclers. The padres in particular saw the Indian as he
_is_ in his daily occupations, in his mind, in his traditional worship,
as well as in his warrior adventuring. When these shall have received due
recognition from students of the Southwest, we may begin to hope that we
shall understand the First Americans.

Looking at Ácoma as symbolic of all Indian “city-states,” are we not
forced to admit that the white invader has pretty completely blotted out
one type of the human family? So altered are the fragmentary remains of
its religious and its social organization that they appear to be hardly
more significant to the white onlooker than is any picturesque pageant;
while to the Indian himself they must be rather a poor imitation of his
traditional ceremonial.

It is too late to ask whether or not white conquest could have been less
cruel, but surely our reconstruction might have been less ruthless.

It is asserted by those who know that “nearly a thousand languages have
given way before the Anglo-Saxon speech.” When the American succeeded
to the Spanish over-lordship of the aborigine, why did he not heed the
example of his English forbears in their rule of subject races? Tolerant
of all that was most sacred and inherent to the conquered, recent English
colonial policy has had for a fundamental principle the fostering of
native genius, and a respect for the faith and ritual, essential to those
brought under subjection.

This served as well the useful end of making conquest less offensive
and obedience more willing. It makes one envious of what Sir Valentine
Chirol writes of his rulers when they mastered India. “They respected
the customs of the people, tried to understand their needs, and gave the
humblest folk a new sense of security from arbitrary oppression, and a
new conception of justice as a boon that was neither to be bought nor
sold.”

The Spaniard was the pioneer invader and conqueror. The American should
have grasped his opportunity as trustee of a rich and original element
in the land. Trustees accept a duty and responsibility along with new
power, the success or failure of which lies within their own hands. But
the white man began by imposing upon the Indian a religion so unlike his
own that it soon became a weapon of deceit, and a dangerous impediment to
their mutual understanding.

The system under which these wards of the nation are ruled to-day would
doubtless protest against the old phrase that “the only good Indian is
a dead Indian,” but in practice it does not materially improve on that
unhappy formula.

In justice to a great inheritance of art and of primitive literature (for
the chant and the folk-lore are the germ of written tales), can we not
_now_ arouse a public pride for the appreciation of this legacy, which
constitutes, as has been said earlier in these pages, the only original
contribution of the western world to either form of creative genius.

The healthy association of the races should promote an education that
pays heed to the needs and mentality of the Indian, fostering his deft
fingers in his native crafts instead of teaching him that machine-made
and artificially dyed rugs are superior; that would help him to develop
his innate agricultural talent by better implements and a more generous
use of soils and of irrigation. At least let him be protected from
political exploitation and even from the selfishness of too ardent
exploring students.

It does not fall within this writer’s province to suggest solutions for
one of the most urgent and complex of national problems. She only desires
to bring before the bar of public opinion the tangle of difficulties
largely created by an indifference to Indian philosophy and sensitiveness
and to a misuse of power which has bred a deep sense of racial injustice.




APPENDIX




APPENDIX


I. THE NAME ÁCOMA

  _Ako_ (of obscure ethnology). They call their own people Ákomi
    (mi = people). It is translated as People of the White Rock.

  _Hacus_ of Fray Marcos of Niza.

  _Ácuco_ of Coronado.

  _Hakukue_ in Zuñi language, meaning “drinkers of the dew.”

  _A-ko-kai-obi_ in Hopi language, meaning “the place of the
    ladle,” and referring to the two great natural reservoirs upon
    the summit.

  _Ácoma Clans_ extinct:

    Kuishkosh    Blue corn
    Kuishtiti    Brown corn
    Moshaich     Buffalo
    Haka         Fire

  _Clans_ still existent:[264]

    Kuüts        Antelope
    Tsits        Water
    Kusesh       White corn
    Kochinish    Yellow corn
    Tyami        Eagle
    Osach        Sun
    Huwaka       Sky
    Shawiti      Parrot
    Shask        Road-runner
    Hapanyi      Oak
    Shquwi       Rattlesnake
    Sii          Ant
    Kuwhaia      Bear
    Tsina        Turkey
    Tani         Calabash

Dr. Elsie Clews Parsons, in 1918, adds to the clans: Chaparral, Cock,
Tansy-Mustard, and Lizard (this last may be identical with Rattlesnake).
She omits Road-runner and Ant. In 1922 we were told that the Snake was
extinct.

Other pueblos occupied by Ácoma clans at various early periods were
Heash-Koa, two miles southwest, by the Red-corn clan; and Kowina, fifteen
miles west, by the Calabash clan. This was a mesa at the head of the
Cebollita Valley.


POPULATION

Castañeda (1541) wrote that “Ácoma could place on foot about 200 warriors
and that there was not room on the Rock for much more than 1000 people.”

Espéjo (1581) speaks of more than 6000; Oñate (1595) estimated them at
3000; Villagrá says that there were 6000 at the time of the siege.

In 1680 Ácoma was credited with 1500 inhabitants.

In 1760 there were said to be 1052 inhabitants.

In 1780-81 a smallpox epidemic prevailed, so that ten years later there
were but 820 persons.

In 1910 there were but 691 inhabitants; while Laguna had, in 1910, as
many as 1441.


II. HA-CHAMONI

_Ha-chamoni_ (prayer-sticks) are deposited by the oracle of the cult of
the hunt to convey the messages of the people. The hunt may or may not
take place directly after these offerings, its time being at the pleasure
of the _Ho-aanite_ (theurgist or oracle), who does not himself inform the
pueblo but communicates with the war chief.—MRS. M. C. STEVENSON (of Sía
Pueblo).


III. SALT

Early chroniclers mention the “salt-kernels” of the Cíbolans, and
Cushing found “a trail brokenly traceable for hundreds of miles from the
cliff-town to the inexhaustible Lake of Salt in central New Mexico.” This
salt is superior to any other found in the Southwest and commanded such
a price that Cushing found it often adulterated with other varieties.
He goes on to say that the influence of such a salt supply upon the
movements of large tribes is not confined to those of America, for “all
the great historic trade-routes across Asia were first established
along salt trails.”—_Thirteenth Annual Report_, Bureau of Ethnology and
Anthropology, pp. 352-355.

_Shrine of Salt Woman._ Near, or in, the Grand Cañon, Cárdenas in 1540
used the same trail which the Hopi use to-day when they visit the
Havasupai in Cataract Cañon, or part of the old route of the Hopi to get
salt. The trail apparently crosses the Little Colorado not far from
Moenkopi trail at Tanner Crossing, a few miles below Black Falls. Before
gathering the salt, which hung from the cliffs in “icicles,” the Hopi
laid one prayer-stick before the image of the salt goddess and the other
before the god of war. The gatherer must be suspended over the edge of
the cliff by ropes to reach the icicles.—CUSHING, Bureau of Ethnology and
Anthropology, Vol. VIII, pp. 352-358.

_Salt Place_ (Zuñi Salt Lake) belongs to the Parrot clan. The substance
of a folk-tale collected by Dr. Boas explaining how this happened is
given in “Laguna Genealogies.” When Salt Woman and the Twin War Gods
were on their wanderings they were hospitably entertained by the Parrot
people, when everyone else had refused them admittance. Going farther
southward, Salt Woman met Zuñi Parrot people, to whom she gave her
house; but Laguna informants assert that until her people showed them
how, neither Hopi nor Zuñi folk were able to get the salt out of the
Place. The journey to Salt Place is made in September, and in company
with collectors from Ácoma, a rare case of inter-pueblo coöperation.
Parrot men lead the expedition, while those of the clan who remain at
home are praying in their house. The salt-collector desires to get omens
at the Place; hence he must offer prayer-sticks and then pray. Before
putting the sticks and cigarettes and shell-meal into the water, he must
rub himself with salt. Having taken off his clothes, and standing in
the water, he feels for the salt with his feet and treads it out; then
gathers it with his hands, using neither pick nor shovel. If you are to
have good harvests of wheat or watermelon, or if you are going to kill
a deer, you will see in the water the wheat or watermelon or deer. If
you are going to die you will see yourself lying dead there. Besides
the salt, medicine-water is brought back from Salt Place. On the return
journey, the accompanying war captain sends forward one day before
arrival a messenger to procure two donkeys from the Parrot people. As
the expedition approaches, all the clans-women with the _kurena-cheani_
come out to meet it, and they all sing together for the Salt Woman.
Later these same women distribute the salt. “If an individual wants to
go salt-collecting on his own account he will go to the Parrot clansman
to ask him to make prayer-sticks. If your salt gives out you may ask
the Parrot clan-mother to give you some.”—ELSIE CLEWS PARSONS, Laguna
Genealogies.


IV. TOWERS AND GREAT HOUSES

Were they observation points or granaries or ceremonial places? Or, did
they combine all these with defence? No satisfactory answer yet found,
nor the epoch in which they were constructed. Some have great trees
growing in them, but none has a roof; their walls are so good that they
do not suggest very great age; yet the builders of cliff-dwellings, and
by inference their kindred, the Tower Builders, were far superior in
their art to modern pueblos.


V. KERES (QUERES)

Concerning the origin of the word _Keres_ (Castañeda’s _Quirix_) nothing
can be learned from any of these people, who pronounce it in every
conceivable way. But they all agree that “they have no ethnic name in
Keresan language which sounds anything like it.” We have, therefore, a
confusion of designations for Ácoma.

_Sía_ (_Tsía_) is linguistically a part of the western branch of the
Keres nation. According to fragments of Keres tradition this is the place
on the Jémez River where the Ácomas separated from the other Keres.

The name _Temá_ is applied to the Cochití and to all who talk like them.
Among these are Sía, Ácoma, and Laguna. The two latter are so isolated
from the rest of the Keres nation that frequently they are not listed
with the other pueblos of their stock; when they are, they invariably are
made a separate group by themselves.

The culture of the Keresan tribes is fundamentally similar to that of
the others in the Southwestern area; namely, a dependence upon maize and
other cultivated foods; the use of the _metate_ instead of a mortar for
grinding the maize; terraced houses of stone and adobe; tailored textile
clothing, which involves cultivation of cotton and weaving on a loom; a
pottery decorated in color; much less use of basketry than in non-Pueblo
tribes; the domestication of the turkey; matrilinear descent; a mythology
characterized by migration traditions; each pueblo a “republic” with
governor and war chief elected annually, but the religious head, cacique,
must give his sanction; very complex ritualism; numerous shrines before
which sacred meal and pollen are constantly offered; purification rites
by emetics and head washing; Kachina, or K’at’sina, ceremonies by masked
impersonators; different priests for summer and for winter.

In most pueblos there are made extensive sand paintings for religious
festivals. No writer mentions them at Ácoma. Is this because no strangers
have seen their most sacred celebrations?[265]

The Queres Indians, to which nation Ácoma belongs, have always claimed
the range of the Tanos Mountains and the valleys of the upper Rio Grande
and the Jémez Rivers as their ancestral heritage. The prehistoric
remains in the romantic gorge of the Rito de los Frijoles are said by
the Queres to belong to their people and especially to those who later
settled permanently at Cochití. The medicine men of Cochití paid frequent
visits to holy shrines there as recently as 1890.


VI. LANGUAGE

The ethnologists agree that there is no reason to suppose that only one
language existed among the earliest dwellers in America. Certainly the
Spaniards found the different languages, or dialects, a great source of
confusion in their early expeditions from Mexico into the North. To know
one well was no password to the next or to those beyond.

Dr. Franz Boas says that “at any rate when man began to increase, the
number of languages was legion though sprung from the same root.” As some
tribes grew more powerful and as inter-tribal wars did their fatal work,
“many older stocks were eliminated, to be replaced by the dialects of a
few groups.”[266]

The four pueblo linguistic stocks distinguishable to-day are:

(1) Shoshonean, to which belong all Hopi pueblos, except Hano; (2)
Zuñian; (3) Tanoan; (4) Keresan or Queresan.


VII. KATZÍMO, A DISENCHANTED MESA

Professor Libbey, of Princeton University, describes in _Harper’s
Weekly_, August 28, 1897, the way in which he went, with two assistants
and two heavily laden wagons which contained “among other things a small
cannon, and miles and miles of rope.” After the cannon had been charged,
a large shot was fired to which had been attached a projecting shaft and
ring in the gun. By throwing the shot to the far side of the mesa, it
was possible to construct a kind of bo’sun’s chair which, with pulleys,
lifted Libbey to a point on the smaller end of the rock. A ladder was
now sent up to him, on which the explorer climbed down the face of the
cliff to a point from which he could jump across to the other side of the
chasm. “A few grasses and plants common on the plains below, and these
with one grey rat and some lizards were all the evidences of life to be
seen.”

Libbey admits that “a small cairn-like structure of stones” _might_ have
been the work of human hands; but he was convinced not only that the mesa
had never been a human habitation, but that no fragment of pottery or of
implements of any sort could be found.


VIII. MEDICINE

According to Alexander, medicine has come to be applied to objects and
practices controlling the animistic powers of Nature as the Indian
conceives them. Medicine is, therefore, private magic and may “exist in
the form of a song or spell known to the owner,” in some symbol upon
his body or in some object that he carries in his “medicine bag.” It
may appear in a ceremony or in a system of rites and practices known
to the “medicine lodge.” “The essential idea varies from fetichism to
symbolism.” When fetichistic, the objects are regarded as talismans.
Disease comes from occult powers of wizards or from the anger of certain
animals. Death is the result of necromancy practised by bad men or angry
gods. Medicine ceremonials are quite unlike rain ceremonials.—H. B.
ALEXANDER, _North American Mythology_, p. 269.


IX. SMOKE

Cigars and cigarettes are used by Navajo and Pueblo peoples even for
ritualistic purposes. Smoke is an invocation to “those above” and, being
always a preliminary to councils, came to be known to the white man
as the Pipe of Peace. All Southwestern and California tribes used the
straight tubular pipe of clay or stone. Elaborate pipes are found in
prehistoric mounds, most often among the more northern tribes. However,
in 1922 Dr. J. Walter Fewkes and his corps of archaeological assistants
found on the Mesa Verde National Park a central _Kiva_ unique there so
far as we yet know. Among the objects found in it “were a full dozen
decorated tobacco pipes made of clay, some blackened by use, others
showing no signs that they had ever been smoked.... For many years it
had been suspected that the ancient inhabitants of the Mesa Verde cliff
dwellings were smokers, but these pipes are the first objective evidence
to prove it, and the fact that these objects were found in the shrine of
a sacred room would indicate that they were smoked ceremonially, as is
customary in modern pueblo rites.” The _Kiva_ is known as Pipe Shrine
House.


X. SHAMAN

A word corrupted from the Sanskrit, meaning “ascetic.” A term more or
less interchangeable with “medicine man,” “doctor,” or even “priest.”
Many tribes give Shaman and priest not merely distinct, but antagonistic
functions. The priest is keeper and demonstrator of rituals. The Shaman
mystifies by jugglery, pretends to foretell events and control them by
incantations, and by fetish-practice prevents the evil spirits to whom
all mishaps are attributed from working harm. Since disease is mischief
done by evil spirits, Shamans treat the sick. They are the workers of
“good magic,” and preside over ceremonies peculiar to their healing
powers. When they fail they become wizards and practisers of “bad magic,”
and are feared and if possible are put out of the way.


XI. SERPENT

The great mythic serpent is as much a sky-being as one of earth. The
lightning and the Milky Way are his sky attributes. He is the emblem of
healing and of fertility in our Southwest.

    “Any element or phenomenon in nature which is believed to
    possess a personal existence is endowed with a personality
    analogous to that of the animal whose operations most resemble
    its manifestations; e.g., lightning is given the form of a
    serpent, with or without the arrow-pointed tongue because its
    course through the sky is serpentine, its stroke instantaneous
    and destructive; yet it is named Wi-lo-lo-a-ne, a word derived
    not from the name of the serpent itself but from its most
    obvious trait, its gliding zig-zag motion. For this reason the
    serpent is supposed to be more nearly related to lightning
    than to man, but more nearly related to man than is lightning,
    because mortal and destructive.”—CUSHING, _Zuñi Fetiches,
    Second Annual Report_, Bureau of Ethnology and Anthropology, p.
    9.

The writer is indebted to a California friend for the following examples
of hypnosis by rattlesnakes.

“When I was a young girl visiting on a ranch in Napa County, California,
I had the following interesting experience, which was unusual, in fact,
unique. Napa County is infested with rattlesnakes; subconsciously we were
never unaware of the danger and, as children, killed many of them. The
country was a particularly well-favored spot for the raising of turkeys
and as we often drove them into the stubble fields where the grasshoppers
were to be found we became accustomed to the ways of these very sensitive
domesticated birds. Their usual mournful whine would give way to an alert
cry if a hawk or buzzard began to circle over us in the sky and we also
noticed a very peculiar and distinct cry when a rattlesnake was seen by
them: _Brrrup_, _Brrrup_, in a very high piercing key.

“One day we were in the house when we heard this peculiar snake cry from
the throats of about one hundred young birds. They were only about four
weeks old and were in a small, well-protected snake-proof enclosure.
Two of us ran out to see what could have happened, and this is what we
saw—a rattlesnake the size of a lead pencil coiled in one corner and
surrounding him all the turkeys in a semi-circle with heads stretched to
the fullest, slowly but surely hypnotized and moving towards the swaying
head of the snake. So absorbed were they that neither the snake nor the
turkeys heard us. We watched the performance long enough to be sure of
what was happening and then, with the never forgotten stick, killed the
snake. The little turkeys, released from the spell, shook themselves,
blinked, yawned and stood around confused until their little brains
registered safety.

“I was talking with a friend of mine about Lower California one day
and he was telling me of the fascinating beauty of it. ‘However,’ he
said, ‘it has one great drawback and that is the size and number of the
rattlesnakes.’ He said that it was not at all unusual to see them five
feet long with bodies the size of a quart bottle and heads that would
cover the palm of his hand.

“One day while hunting he saw a thrush behaving in a most peculiar manner
under a bush. It was jumping up and down in one spot, feathers ruffled
and fairly crying in a terrified manner. He crawled under the bush and
there he saw one of these huge rattlers hypnotizing the bird. As soon
as the snake saw him and turned his head towards him the bird flew away
unharmed. He had his gun and shot from the hip, killing the snake.

“Another experience he had that was interesting. A boy jumped down on
to a ledge and failed to see a huge snake almost red in color that was
coiled on rocks of the same color. A companion, afraid that he might
hurt the boy, shot the snake near the tail. The snake writhed for some
time and then, apparently realizing it could not move, turned and stung
itself, dying within a few minutes.”


XII. LIGHTNING

Mrs. Stevenson records of the Queres people that the “lightning-people
shoot their arrows to make it rain harder, the smaller flashes coming
from the bows of the children. Thunder-people by making a great noise
frighten the lightning and cloud-peoples to work harder.” The rainbow
people were created to make the sky more beautiful for the earth people.


XIII. THE SWASTIKA AND PRIMITIVE CROSS-SYMBOLS

The swastika, a symbol in the form of a Greek Cross with the end of the
arms bent at right angles all in the same direction, and each prolonged
to the height of the parallel arm of the cross. Full discussion of
the swastika is found in Mrs. Zelia Nuttall’s “Old and New World
Civilizations.” She finds these symbols universally accompanied
by vestiges of a certain set of cosmical concepts and a scheme of
organization which can be traced back to an original pole-star worship.
The calendar swastika or cross of ancient Mexico gives absolute proof of
native association with ideas of rotary motion and progress of time, and
furnishes an indication that it may have been used by primitive races as
a sign for a year or a cycle. Cushing found almost precisely the same
thing among the Zuñi priesthood.


XIV. RELIGIOUS IMPORT OF THE DANCE

“Not the epic song, but the dance, accompanied by a monotonous and often
meaningless song constitutes everywhere the most primitive, and in spite
of that primitiveness, the most highly developed art. Whether as a ritual
dance, or as a purely emotional expression of the joy in rhythmic bodily
movement, it rules the life of primitive man to such a degree that all
other forms of art are subordinate to it.”—WUNDT, _Völker Psychologie_,
3rd ed. Bd. 1 Teil 1, p. 277.




FOOTNOTES


[1] “Mesas appear to furnish the most direct and convincing testimony we
have of the tremendous power of the wind in effecting general erosion
under conditions of aridity. That water could not possibly produce such
effects is shown in a number of ways. On the continental divide the
streams are smallest. Drainage features are necessarily insignificant.
Rainfall is the scantiest. These summit plains of the continent are a
region of continual high wind and constant sand-storm. By wind action
alone there appears to be incontestable testimony that from the entire
area of the vast arid region there has been lifted and exported in very
recent geologic times a prodigious layer of rock not less than 5000 feet
in thickness. Thus it is that arid regions have introduced us to an
erosive agent more potent than stream-corrosion, more constant than the
washing of rains, more extensive and persistent than the encroachments of
the sea.”—CHARLES R. KEYES, _Wind-Graved Mesas and their Message_.

[2] Coronado did not pass Inscription Rock on his way from Zuñi to Ácoma,
but went a little south of it. The earliest inscription on El Morro _with
a date_ is that of Oñate, 1606, but we found an undated autograph of
Luxan, a member of Espéjo’s force. It was easily identified by comparing
it with his characteristic signature in an as yet unpublished manuscript.
E. H. Vogt, describing some recently explored ice-caves near Ramah, N.
M., mentions “two old Indian trails six or eight miles south of the road.
One of these enters the lava bed and crosses it in line with El Morro and
Ácoma. This was perhaps the way Coronado travelled with his Zuñi guides
in 1540.”—_El Palacio_, February 1, 1924.

[3] Bandelier maintains that no tribe so influenced the fate of the
Southwest as did the Apache. Twitchell affirms that “the word ‘Indian’
in all the laws whether Spanish or Mexican, and the treaty of Guadalupe
Hidalgo, was not intended to cover, nor to refer to any ‘Indians’ other
than those living in villages ... who are invariably referred to and
described as _naturales_ and _pueblos_ and as _indios de pueblos_. For
the other Indians, such as the Apaches, Comanches, Utes or Navajos, the
term savages—_Salvajes_ or _Indios barbaros_—was always the descriptive
and differentiating form of expression.”—R. E. Twitchell, _Leading Facts
in New Mexican History_.

[4] Espéjo called those Indians _Navajos_ who haunted the mountains near
Ácoma. Castañeda describes the “Querechas and Teyas” (of the eastern
plains) “as being better warriors, having better figures and are more
feared. They travel like the Arabs with their tents and troops of dogs
loaded with poles and having Moorish pack-saddles with girths.”

[5] “They” (the Sedentary Indians of New Mexico) “live some of them in
the identical houses their forefathers occupied at the time of Coronado’s
expedition (1541-2) as at Ácoma, Jémez and Taos, and although their
plan and mode of life have changed in some respects in the interval,
it is not unlikely that they remain to this day a fair example of the
life of the Village Indians from Zuñi to Cuzco as it existed in the
16th century.”—Lewis H. Morgan, _Houses and House-life of the American
Aborigines_, in Vol. IV, U. S. Geological Survey, _Contributions to
American Ethnology_.

See Appendix I.

[6] An _estado_ is 5 feet, 7 inches—about the height of an average man.

[7] W. W. H. Davis, in his history of New Mexico, says ten acres in
area—which must be either a slip or a misprint.

[8] George Wharton James, _Land of the Delight Makers_.

[9] Descriptions of Ácoma are in Bancroft, _Native Races_, Vol. IV,
pp. 365, 366; Lummis, _The California Magazine_, January, 1892. Other
references may be found in the bibliography, under Engelhardt, Hodge,
Lummis, James, and Prince.

[10] For Ácoma,—George Wharton James, _The Land of the Delight Makers_.

[11] Called _piki_ in Hopi, and _hewe_ in Zuñi.

[12] According to Lummis, another reservoir on the southern mesa is
reached by a toilful path up and down the craggy slope. We did not see
this.

[13] Mt. Taylor, 11,389 feet high. At Ácoma it is called _Spi-nat_.

[14] Or else from twenty miles to the west from “the great frowning
pine-fringed Mesa Prieta at whose feet lies the beautiful Vale of
Cebollita.”—Hodge, _Land of Sunshine_, November, 1897.

[15] _Land of Sunshine_, Vol. 15, 1901, p. 320. The article is supplied
with illustrations.

[16] Shelley, _Daemon of the World_.

[17] Hodge, _Handbook of American Indians_; also, _Notes to Benavides
Memorial_. Lummis, _Poco Tiempo_; _Spanish Pioneers_.

[18] Goddard says Coronado’s Ácoma was partly burned in 1599 but that the
village was not destroyed in the revolt of 1680, and therefore the walls
now in use may be the same as those seen in 1540, partly rebuilt and
repaired from time to time. _Handbook—Indians of the Southwest_, p. 73.

A writer in _El Palacio_ for August, 1918, mentions a tradition that
Ácoma has the only church that survived the rebellion of 1680, but says
that authorities do not agree upon this and that Hodge declares no trace
of the old edifice remains except the carved beams found in one of the
houses of Middle Row. It would seem as if the letter of the commanding
Spanish officer should clear away all confusion about this building.

[19] A fuller account may be read in _El Palacio_ for January 1, 1925.

[20] An interesting article, _Painting the Town Red_, by Professor C. F.
Crane, showing the relation of the color scarlet or some shade of red
to burial wrappings and ceremonials, may be found in the _Scientific
Monthly_ for June, 1924. On pp. 612, 613, the author cites instances
among the Sioux tribes in the eighteenth century.

[21]

    Four days is the spirit’s journey
      To the land of ghosts and shadows,
    Four its lonely night encampments;
    Therefore, when the dead are buried,
    Let a fire as night approaches,
    Four times on the grave be kindled,
    That the soul upon its journey
    May not grope about in darkness.

        —LONGFELLOW, _Song of Hiawatha_.

[22] The _Cheani_ are the medicine men or curative shamans, who are
officers also of weather control.

[23] The Indian word is _ha-chamoni_, meaning “they take the breath.” It
is invariably a notched stick with plumes attached, and is illustrated
in _Eleventh Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology, p. 78. See
Appendix II.

[24] The Warrior Dance.

[25] _Kasik_ is given as the Keres form of cacique.

[26] This is the same as the _asa_ at Hopi or the _ise_ at Laguna.

[27] To avoid confusion, it is wise to reserve the word _kiva_ for
the ceremonial chamber of the Indian pueblo, and _estufa_ for the
sweat-houses.

[28] _Final Report_, Pt. I, p. 268.

[29] Cosmos Mindeleff, Introduction to _Eighth Annual Report_, Bureau of
American Ethnology, p. xxxi.

[30] _Relación de Father Fray Francisco de Escobar_, October, 1605. Also
in Bandelier, _Final Report_, Pt. I, pp. 143-145.

[31] Description by Leslie Spier, _Havasupai Days_, in _American Indian
Life_, edited by Elsie Clews Parsons.

[32] In certain tribes women have rites to perform that necessitate
_kivas_ for their special use.

[33] Lummis, _The Land of Poco Tiempo_.

[34] Charles Alexander Eastman (Ohiyesa), _The Soul of an Indian. An
Interpretation_.

[35] Translated by Alice Fletcher, in the _Path on the Rainbow_, edited
by George Cronyn.

[36] _The Coronado Expedition by Castañeda_, _Fourteenth Annual Report_,
Bureau of American Ethnology, translated by G. P. Winship; _The Journey
of Coronado_, _Trail Makers’ Series_, 1904, translated by Winship; _The
Narrative of the Expedition of Coronado by Pedro de Castañeda_, _Spanish
Explorers in the Southern United States_, edited by F. W. Hodge.

[37] _Doc. Inéd. de Indios_, Vol. III, _Relación du Voyage de Cíbola_,
translated by Ternaux Compans; abstract in English by Fewkes in _Journal
of American Ethnology and Archaeology_, Vol. III, 1892.

[38] Very exhaustive studies and excavations were made of Háwikuh
by Frank Hamilton Cushing, between 1879 and 1888. His reports can
be consulted in the _Thirteenth Annual Report_, Bureau of American
Ethnology, and in separate monographs. There are later studies by Fewkes
and Stevenson.

[39] Hodge affirms that Jaramillo and Zárate-Salmerón say it was Háwikuh.
_American Anthropologist_, April, 1895.

[40] There are many spellings of this name. According to Hodge, “Ako” is
the Indian form. See Appendix I.

[41] Winship, _Coronado Expeditions_, Chapter XII, p. 490. “They
described some cows, which from a picture that one of them had painted on
his skin seemed to be cows, although from the hides this seemed not to be
possible, because the hair was woolly and snarled, so that we could not
tell what sort of skins they had.”

Best brief account in Bolton, _Spanish Borderlands_.

[42] Castañeda.

[43] Translated by Winship, and included in each of his works on the
expedition; also _American History Leaflets_, No. 13.

[44] Winship, _The Coronado Expedition_, pp. 491, 560, 569, 575.

[45] Between June 7 and July 10, 1540.

[46] Three reliable records exist of this _entrada_. The translations of
Pedro de Bustamente, and another by Barrado and Escalante, may be read in
Bolton, _Spanish Exploration in the Southwest_. A third by Gallegos, “The
Scrivener,” is translated by Mecham: MS. thesis in the Bolton Collection.

[47] Two manuscripts recently discovered prove beyond question that the
Father had been put to death by the Indians of the Sierra Morena or
Sandía mountains before the soldiers returned to Mexico. The viceroy, we
now know, had incorporated this information in his report to the Spanish
King. Bolton was the first person to make use of this material. It was
further elaborated by J. Lloyd Mecham in a thesis for the Master’s degree
at the University of California. See also the article by Mecham on the
“Death of Fray Santa María” in _Catholic Historical Review_, October,
1920.

[48] Querecho was a pueblo name for the buffalo-hunting Apache Indians
east of New Mexico (Hodge, _Handbook_, II, 338).

[49] The snake dance is now characteristically a Hopi ceremony, where
it is primarily a prayer for rain. It was formerly widespread among
the pueblo tribes and traces of it are still found at Ácoma and other
places.—Walter Hough, in Hodge, _Handbook_, II, 605, 606.

[50] Bolton, _Spanish Exploration in the Southwest_, 182, 183.

[51] Bureau of American Ethnology, _Thirteenth Annual Report_, 327.

[52] _Historia de la Nuevo Mejico del Capitán Gaspar de Villagrá_, Año
1610, Con privilegio. En _Alcala_ por Luys Martínez Grande. Translated in
part in Bancroft and in Read.

[53] Bancroft, _Arizona and New Mexico_.

[54] _Historical Documents relating to New Mexico_ (edited by Charles
Wilson Hackett, Ph.D., Carnegie Institution, Washington, D.C.), pp. 264
_et seq._

[55] Translated in Bancroft, _Arizona and New Mexico_.

[56] A religious inspector.

[57] The Crossing. Here the trail crossed the river and threaded the pass
through the mountains. It was a crossing in a double sense.

[58] Canto XVI, translated in Read, _History of New Mexico_, p. 213.

[59] It may not be entirely beside the point to note here that this
same Bernabé de las Casas, a few years after this event, projected an
expedition across the country from the Rio Grande to drive the English
out of Jamestown.

[60] _Ytinerario de las Minas del Caxco._ Translated by Bolton, in
_Spanish Exploration in the Southwest_.

[61] Read, _History of New Mexico_, pp. 226, 227.

[62] Villagrá, _Historia de la Nueva Mexico_, Canto XXV. Translated in
Read, pp. 229-231.

[63] From Villagrá, Folio 222. Translated by Mrs. N. V. Sanchez.

[64] Villagrá, Canto XXX.

[65] Engelhardt, _Franciscan Herald_, February, 1920.

[66] Villagrá, _Historia_, Canto XVIII, gives the weapons used by the
Ácomas as shields of buckskin, bows and flint-tipped arrows, war-clubs,
and a helmet of buffalo hide.

[67] Read, _History of New Mexico_, p. 229.

[68] No satisfactory translation of Villagrá’s narrative has yet
appeared, and the writer is indebted for the material used in this
paraphrase to Lummis, _The Spanish Pioneers_.

[69] This is, so far as known, the only mention of subterranean passages
cut in the Rock. Do they still exist and are they used?

[70] _American Historical Review_, October, 1917.

[71] A translation of this remarkable account may be found in the article
by Bourke, _American Anthropologist_, Vol. VIII, April, 1894.

[72] Perea served as custodian until 1633 or 1636, and during that period
founded the church and monastery at Sandía, where he was buried.

[73] A graphic description of the discomforts of the “Jornado del Muerto”
in 1888 may be read in _The Land of the Pueblos_, by Mrs. Lew Wallace.

[74] The name Robledo is still on the map, sixty miles above El Paso.

[75] The text gives the celebration as the “Pascua del Espiritú Santo.”
Hodge and Lummis translate this as Easter, which would make the march
from Robledo to Santa Fé, including the delay of four days, only a
week in passing. In the Roman church the Feast of the Holy Spirit is
Pentecost, the celebration of the descent of the Holy Ghost upon the
disciples of Christ, and comes fifty days after Easter. We need not infer
that the party did not reach Santa Fé somewhat earlier than Pentecost,
but only that it was this Holy Day they celebrated there.

[76] The _Encyclopaedia Britannica_ gives no such places as Abasia or
Mount Amar. It does speak of _Amasia_ with an acropolis on a lofty cliff
overhanging the town. This is a town in Anatolia (Turkey), splendidly
situated in a narrow gorge on both sides of a river and eighty miles
from its mouth. It contains remarkable antiquities such as the tombs of
the kings of Pontus, described by Strabo. (Illustrated in the _National
Geographic Magazine_, July, 1918, in article “Under the Heel of the
Turk.”)

[77] Translated by Mrs. E. E. Ayer in _Land of Sunshine_, Vol. XIII.

[78] Vetancur, _Menológio Seráfico_, IV, pp. 246-248.

[79] C. W. Hackett, _Revolt of the Pueblo Indians in New Mexico in 1680_;
(The Quarterly of Texas State Historical Association, October, 1911).
Prince, _A Concise History of New Mexico_; Read, _History of New Mexico_;
W. H. H. Davis, _The Spanish Conquest of New Mexico_.

[80] _Apach-u_, a Piman word meaning “man.”

[81] This method of reckoning time has been observed in many countries
and in all ages. Herodotus describes it as a device of Darius for the
Ionian chiefs: Boturini found it among the relics of ancient Mexico,
and in the Polynesian islands it has not yet altogether disappeared.
According to Fiske, the Spaniards were “astonished at seeing how many
things the Peruvians could record with their _quipus_ (knotted cords).”
_Discovery of America_, Vol. II, pp. 298-300.

[82] The Navajo, Havasupai and Walapai use knotted cords to-day in just
this way to keep account of time, but not for other purposes.

[83] La Toma is within the present limits of Texas near the monastery of
Guadalupe.

[84] Hackett, p. 155.

[85] Hackett, _The Pueblo Revolt of 1680_.

[86] Vetancur gives a list of all the missions as they existed just
before the Revolt with valuable details about some of them. Of Ácoma
he says it was dedicated to S. Estévan on a peñol east of Sía. It was
one league in circumference and had fifteen hundred inhabitants who had
been converted by Fray Juan Ramírez. “In 1680 they put to death their
padre, Fray Lucas Maldonado, native of Tribujona of the same province.”
Vetancur, _Crónica_, III.

[87] Escalante, _Carta_, 122, 123, translated in Bancroft, _Arizona and
New Mexico_, Vol. XVII, footnote to p. 185.

[88] Between 1680-1692 we have the record of Don Carlos de Siguënza y
Góngora, _Mercurio Volante_, Mexico, 1693. In this the number of soldiers
is given as nine. Translated by Read, _History of New Mexico_, p. 288.

[89] From the Journals of De Vargas printed in translation in _Ola Santa
Fé_, January, 1914, and October, 1916; Bandelier, _Final Report_, Part
II, pp. 215, 216, also gives some details. Also in Twitchell, _Some
Leading Facts in New Mexico History_.

[90] The same L’Archeveque who, when a younger man, traitorously helped
to assassinate his leader La Salle in 1687. Now in middle age, he was
serving Spain, and in the Franco-Hispanic War of 1720 he was sent on an
errand to the junction of the North and South Platte rivers, where he
met his death in a surprise attack on the Pawnee Indians just as he was
breaking camp to return to Santa Fé.

[91] Bancroft, _Arizona and New Mexico_, p. 226.

[92] A letter to the _Procurador-General_, Fray José Miguel de los Ríos,
from Father Trigo, July 23, 1754, concerning the Christian and political
government of the mission of San Pedro and San Pablo in New Mexico.

[93] A _fanega_ equals two and one-half bushels.

[94] An _almud_ equals one-fifth of a bushel.

[95] For this and the preceding items the writer is indebted to Miss E.
M. Healey (MS. thesis), University of California, Department of History.

[96] Good accounts are in James, _Land of Delight Makers_, and Prince,
_Spanish Mission Churches of New Mexico_. It is this building upon which
were based the designs for the exhibition house of New Mexico at the San
Diego exposition in 1915-16, as well as part of the new art museum in
Santa Fé.

[97] Elliott Coues, _On the Trail of a Spanish Pioneer_.

[98] Lummis, _Some Strange Corners of our Country_, Chapter XXII, and
_Mesa, Cañon and Pueblo_, Chapter XXIX; Twitchell, _Spanish Archives of
New Mexico_, pp. 458-462.

[99] The Judge was Hon. Kirby Benedict, in early manhood a personal
friend of Abraham Lincoln, who was in 1858 appointed Chief Justice of
New Mexico. A second judgment of his given in favor of Ácoma was a case
of some celebrity. Several citizens of New Mexico sought to recover a
sum of money on account of there having been delivered to the pueblo one
hundred and sixty-six years previously the title deeds to its lands in
New Mexico, for which these New Mexicans claimed the Indians of Ácoma had
agreed to pay. The verdict of the Justice is a delicious piece of irony
and satire, qualities for which he was renowned. _Old Santa Fé_, July,
1913, pp. 75-81.

[100] MS. as yet unpublished in English, in the Bolton Collection.

[101] In _The Indian’s Book_, recorded and edited by Natalie Curtis
Burlin.

[102] W. H. Ketcham, 1919, Indian agent for the Rio Grande Pueblos.

[103] _Op. cit._

[104] _Report_, Department of the Interior, September 30, 1905.

[105] Senate Bill 3855—commonly known as the Bursum Indian Land Bill.

[106] It is but the obverse of the shield of 1680, when “Otermín called
a council of war at which it was decided that it would be better to die
fighting than of starvation and hunger.”—Hackett.

[107] Fynn, _The American Indian as a Product of Environment_, p. 62.

[108] F. J. Turner, _The Frontier in American History_. Elsie Clews
Parsons, _Laguna Genealogies_. _Anthropological Papers of the American
Museum of Natural History_, Vol. VIII, 1923. See Appendix III.

[109] Cushing, _Thirteenth Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology,
pp. 352-358. A “parallel example of the influence of salt sources on
the movements of primitive peoples may be found in that all the great
historic trade routes across Asia were first established along salt
trails of prehistoric times.”

[110] Fewkes, _Twenty-eighth Annual Report_, Bureau of American
Ethnology, p. 160.

[111] The Spanish word “pueblo,” meaning village, was given by the early
explorers to any group of habitations, but it has to-day a derived and
technical significance, restricted to a communal village, with separated
but adjacent apartments in house-blocks, which, while providing privacy,
are more easily defended than are isolated houses.

[112] Fewkes, _Twenty-eighth Annual Report_, Bureau of American
Ethnology, pp. 158, 159.

[113] Fewkes, _Prehistoric Ruins in Gila Valley_. Smithsonian
Miscellaneous Collection, Vol. LII.

[114] Leslie Spier, _Anthropological Papers of The American Museum of
Natural History_, Vol. XVIII.

[115] Fewkes, _Preliminary Report on Navajo National Monument, Arizona_,
1911.

[116] Edgar L. Hewett, _Communautés Anciennes dans le Désert Americain_.
See Appendix IV.

[117] Cosmos Mindeleff, _Localization of Tusayán Clans_. _Nineteenth
Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology, Pt. II.

[118] Stevenson, _The Sía_. _Eleventh Annual Report_, Bureau of American
Ethnology.

[119] Bolton, _De Mézières_, Vol. II, pp. 279, 280, contains a vivid
description of the use of the buffalo. A valuable sketch of migrations
appears in Kroeber, Introduction to _American Indian Life_, edited by
Elsie Clews Parsons.

[120] Fewkes, _Twenty-second Annual Report_, Bureau of American
Ethnology, p. 194.

[121] Winship, _Fourteenth Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology.

[122] The other pueblos of the Keresan nation are San Felipe, Santo
Domingo, Santa Ana, Cochití, Sía, and to the west, near Ácoma, is Laguna,
her daughter colony. “The Keresans are referred to in the creation
legend of Zuñi, as ‘The Drinkers of the Dew,’ because their houses were
scattered abroad on hills remote from water” “Cushing.”

[123] According to Hopi legend, clans called the Tcá-ma-hia left Snake
clans at Wukoki, a ruin on the Little Colorado, still visible fifty
miles west of the East mesa of Hopi. From here they made their way east
to Ácoma, where they met other clans from the east, which were in all
probability also Keresan. See Appendix V.

[124] _Nineteenth Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology, Pt. II.

[125] _Investigations Among American Indians_, Pt. I, p. 34. But in Pt.
II, p. 31, he refers to Taos, apparently a contradiction to the foregoing
statement: “Taos, built on both sides of the swift and cool Rio de Taos,
is the only village in New Mexico, ancient or modern, the situation of
which corresponds with Castañeda’s description and location.”

[126] Mrs. Matilda Cox Stevenson, _Eleventh Annual Report_, Bureau of
American Ethnology.

[127] Cebollita, a large stone pueblo surrounded by a noble stone wall
already deserted and forgotten in Coronado’s days. The Keres Pueblos
still tell the legend of their “Año de la Lumbre,” the year of fire, when
their forbears were driven out of this valley by the river of lava that
flowed over the region (Lummis).

[128] Bandelier, _Final Report_, II, 324.

[129] From the _Relación_ of Fray Marcos, Bandelier quotes, after
describing Marata and Totonteac: “There is also another very large
province and kingdom, named Acus. There is also Ahacus, and that word,
with aspiration, is one of the Seven Cities, the largest of them all; and
Acus, without aspiration, is a province by itself.”

[130] The Indians conceal information of all sorts about the various
ruins, near and far, for knowledge of these ruins is often sacred and the
prerogative of special branches of their ritual organization. Moreover,
enquiring students are sometimes further baffled by the faking of
ceremonial celebrations at unusual seasons for their special benefit.

[131] Fewkes, _American Journal of Art and Archaeology_, Vol. IV. See
Appendix VI.

[132] Mrs. Stevenson also says that Sía has an Oraibí legend of a time
when its tribe did not live as now upon the third mesa of Hopi.

[133] _American Anthropologist_, April, 1895, Vol. VIII.

[134] _Journal of American Ethnology and Art_, Vol. IV. More briefly
given in _Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology, Vol. XIX, Pt. II.

[135] A great variety of models of Hopi sand pictures may be seen at the
Field Museum in Chicago.

[136] After leaving Si-pa-pu, the mythical place of origin in the north,
the Ácomas traditionally occupied: 1. Kashkachuti; 2. Washpashuka; 3.
Kuchtya; 4. Tsiama; 5. Tapitsíama; 6. Katzímo (the Enchanted Mesa) three
miles northward from the Crag of Ácoma.

According to certain legends collected by Dr. E. L. Hewett from San Juan,
the Keresans did not originate, as most of the others did, at Si-pa-pu,
but at Cueva (the hole or cave) in Taos country. Dr. Parsons was once
told at Ácoma that Si-pa-pu was “north of Taos” and at another time that
it was at “Los Vegas.” Dr. Hewett also visited a brackish lake in the
sand dunes north of Alamosa, Colorado, which the greater mass of legend
identifies with Si-pa-pu. The road was treacherous from quicksands, and
so fast did the dunes shift that they were hardly recognizable from
week to week. Though this is not a volcanic region, the small lake of
very black, forbidding-looking water was much like crater lakes. It
measured about 300 feet across and emitted an offensive odor. There
was a continuous line of dead cattle on its shores and no settlements
within many miles. See Haeberlein for Si-pa-pu, in _Memoirs of the
Anthropological Association_, Vol. III, 1916.

[137] Lummis puts this into a charming form in his collection of stories,
_A New Mexico David_.

[138] Idem, _Land of Poco Tiempo_.

[139] Agnes C. Laut, _Through our Unknown Southwest_.

[140] “The Disenchanted Mesa,” _Harper’s Weekly_, August 28, 1897. Also
in _The Princeton Press_, August 21, 1897. See Appendix VII.

[141] Hodge, _Land of Sunshine_, November, 1897; also _Century Magazine_,
Vol. LVI, 1898.

[142] Kroeber, Introduction to _American Indian Life_, edited by Elsie
Clews Parsons.

[143] Kroeber, _Zuñi Kin and Clan_.

[144] Elsie Clews Parsons, _Laguna Genealogies, American Museum
Anthropological Papers_, Vol. XIX, Pt. V, 1923. Kroeber, _Zuñi Kin and
Clan, American Museum Anthropological Papers_, Vol. XVIII, Pt. II.

[145] Mrs. M. C. Stevenson, _The Zuñi Indian_ (Bureau of American
Ethnology, _Twenty-third Annual Report_). See also Bureau of American
Ethnology, _Ninth Annual Report_, p. 116. Kroeber, _Zuñi Kin and Clan_.

[146] Kroeber, _op. cit._

[147] Part of the feeling about the _ettowe-iyatik_ type of fetish is
the extreme reluctance to disturb it, or to remove it; so that as long
as there is a woman who can be trusted to safeguard the fetish properly
in its house, i.e., to feed it, and to preclude intrusion, the fetish
will be left in the house it is associated with. On the other hand, it is
the men who are supposed to know the songs and prayers associated with
the fetish. Elsie Clews Parsons, _Laguna Genealogies, American Museum
Anthropological Papers_, Vol. VIII, 1923. See Appendix VIII.

[148] A. L. Kroeber, “Thoughts on Zuñi Religion,” _Holmes Memorial
Volume_.

[149] Full discussions of his functions in Bandelier, _Final Report_, Pt.
I, 278 _et seq._

[150] There is a good account of this ceremony and duty in a story
called _The Flute of the Gods_, by Marah Ellis Ryan, which gives a vivid
impression of what is probably true of many of the tribes.

[151] A word meaning “person in authority.” One informant told the writer
that any officer may be called _hócheni_.

[152] Because of the scarcity of game all through the pueblo region, save
only in the mountains behind Taos, the rabbit hunt is now the only one
pursued.

[153] A very holy shrine of the war captains of Laguna is southeast
of Ácoma, an entirely detached mound, and Dr. Parsons was told by the
sister of the Osach _cheani_ (Sun medicine man) that it would be visited
by men of Ácoma, Zuñi, and other towns. This is described in figures
in _American Anthropologist_, Vol. XX, No. 4, p. 382. There are also
beautiful illustrations of war feather-sticks.

[154] _American Anthropologist_, Vol. XX.

[155] _Final Report_, Pt. I, p. 285.

[156] “Antelope Clan in Keresan Customs and Myths,” _Man_, December, 1917.

[157] _Notes on Ácoma and Laguna_, _American Anthropologist_, Vol. XX.

[158] This sketch outlines only the barest essentials of the winter
festival. Anyone interested in more detail should read the careful
description by Dr. Parsons.

[159] George Gwyther, M.D., in the _Overland Monthly_, March, 1871, p.
265.

[160] Natalie Curtis Burlin, _The Indians’ Book_.

[161] T. T. Waterman, _The Explanatory Element in the Folk-Tales of the
North American Indians_, _Journal of American Folk-Lore_, Vol. XVII.
Folk-tales are the art of fiction, in its varied “forms of satire and
humor, romance, adventure” (Alexander).

[162] A. M. Espinosa. Collected by Miss Matilda Allen, _Journal of
American Folk-Lore_, Vol. XXVII, 1914.

[163] Cushing, _Zuñi Folk-Tales_.

[164] A ruin at the foot of the mesa on which Ácoma is built. It lies
on the eastern side. It is where their ancestors lived, the people say,
before they built on the mesa.—E. C. Parsons, in _Journal of American
Folk-Lore_, Vol. XXXI, No. 120, April-June, 1918.

[165] “Pueblo-Indian Folk-Tales, Probably of Spanish Provenience,” by
Elsie Clews Parsons. No. 7, “Forgetting the Song; Inside the Lizard”
(_Ácoma_). _The Journal of American Folk-Lore_, April-June, 1918 (Vol.
XXXI, No. 120), pp. 225, 226.

[166] Elsie Clews Parsons, _op. cit._, pp. 219, 220.

[167] Collected by Miss Matilda Allen for Professor Espinosa.

[168] Presumably because Pascual did all the work.

[169] Because he had been told to do everything that others did.

[170] “_No señor, no se dan, se venden._”

[171] “_No señor, no cresen, las gaïnas los ponen._”

[172] _El Palacio_ (Paul A. F. Walter, Editor), Vol. XI, No. 11 (December
1, 1921), pp. 141, 142.

[173] Fynn, _The American Indian as a Product of Environment_.

[174] J. W. Powell, Introduction to F. W. Cushing, _Zuñi Folk-Tales_.

[175] Franz Boas, _Mythology and Folk-Tales of North American Indians_,
_Journal of American Folk-Lore_, Vol. XXVII (1914).

[176] John R. Swanton, _Journal of American Folk-Lore_, Vol. XXIII, 1910.

[177] Matilda Coxe Stevenson, “The Sía,” _Eleventh Annual Report_, Bureau
of American Ethnology.

[178] Alexander suggests that the uncannily large earth-nesting spiders
which abound in this region may have caused the spider to be called the
Earth Goddess wherever it is considered a female.

[179] There is a charming folk-tale of the sun myth in Katharine B.
Judson, _Myths and Legends of California and the Old Southwest_.

[180] Here is no doubt the origin of an Indian custom in many tribes.
When old men part, you see each take the other’s hand to his mouth and
breathe upon it; and when they smoke they blow the first six puffs to the
six different directions of the universe. See Appendix IX.

[181] _Eleventh Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology.

[182] Death meant the end of life on this earth and of certain kinds of
intercourse between the dead and living individuals, “but not by any
means a cessation of all kinds of intercourse” (Boas, _Mythology and
Folk-Tales of the North American Indians_).

[183] J. D. C. Pellow, _Parentalia_.

[184] John T. Short, _North Americans of Antiquity_, pp. 333, _et seq._
See also Sir J. G. Frazer, _The Golden Bough_, Chapter II of the abridged
edition, 1922.

[185] The best-known of all such tales is that of “Quetzlcoatl” of the
Mexicans, familiarized by Lew Wallace under the title, _The Fair God_.
An interesting theory of the origin of this culture-hero is by Dominick
Daly, in _Popular Science Monthly_, Vol. XXXIX, 1891.

[186] Readers are very naturally bewildered by the name, which is the
same as that of the monarch whom Cortés overcame and destroyed. The two
were not the same, since, according to the Pueblos, their god Montezuma
was among them before ever they had known of Mexico, but, after the Roman
Church crushed the native religions of Peru and Mexico, Montezuma the
king and Montezuma the mythical high priest became somewhat confused in
their legendary history.

[187] Emory, _Notes of a Military Reconnaissance of New Mexico, 1846-47_,
p. 64.

[188] Morgan, _Contributions to North American Ethnology_, Vol. IV, pp.
151-153. Good account of “Montezuma of the Pueblos” in Bancroft _Native
Races_, Vol. III, p. 171, _et seq._

“All [the Pueblos] held Montezuma to be their perpetual
Sovereign.”—Josiah Gregg, _Commerce of the Prairies, 1831-39._

[189] Bandelier, _Final Report_, Pt. I, p. 262, and “The Montezuma of
the Pueblo Indians,” _American Anthropologist_, October, 1892, where the
matter of the Mexican servants is treated.

[190] Brinton, _Myths of the New World_, p. 190.

[191] See _Journal of American Folk-Lore_, Vol. XXIII; also Bandelier,
_Final Report_, Pt. I, p. 306.

[192] Bourke says that in November, 1881, when he was at Zuñi, an old
chief who talked Spanish told him that “in the day of long ago all the
Pueblos, Moqui, Zuñi, Ácoma, Laguna, Jémez and others had the religion
of human sacrifice, at the time of the Feast of Fire when the days were
shortest. The victim had his throat cut and blood was allowed to flow
freely but he generally recovered. Although the Mexicans undertook
to prevent this ceremony, a modified form persisted for a long time
thereafter.” _Snake Dance of the Moquis_, p. 164. Hodge, on the contrary,
rejects emphatically the idea that human sacrifice ever existed among the
Pueblos. He says, “It is just the kind of thing the Indian loves to pour
into the eager ears of too gullible whites when they had the effrontery
to pry too familiarly into their beliefs; but what fun they had the next
moment among themselves. Give a Pueblo Indian a hint of the kind of
answer you are seeking and he will accommodate you to the fullest extent.”

[193] Elsie Clews Parsons, _Journal of American Folk-Lore_, Vol. XXXI,
pp. 260, 261; “Mothers and Children at Laguna,” Man, March, 1919; Full
description of maternity myths in _American Anthropologist_, Vol. XX;
“Mother and Children at Zuñi,” _Man_, November, 1919; “Zuñi Conception
and Pregnancy Beliefs” (19th International Cong. Americanists, 1915).

[194] Undoubtedly corrupted Spanish for _Santo_ (Saint).

[195] Cushing gives a long list of these charming names never used by
white visitors.

[196] A wild, ugly-looking man, or animal, that frightens bad boys; hence
any terrible-looking person who frightens others is “el coco.” It is in
general use in Spanish literature, “_meterle el coco a una persona_”
(Espinosa, in _Journal of American Folk-Lore_, Vols. XXIII and XXIX).

[197] In Zuñi an exactly similar character is A’Doshle, though Harrington
refers to him as _Tsabije_ or _t’ete_ (grandfather) (Elsie Clews Parsons,
_Zuñi A’Doshle and Suüke_, in _American Anthropologist_, Vol. XVIII,
1916).

[198] In Holland on St. Nicholas Day, December 5, there is a tradition
and a ceremony performed very similar to the _Agüelo_. In Brittany also
there is the same curious custom.

[199] Paul Radin, _Religion of North American Indians_, _Anthropology in
North America_.

[200] Clark Wissler, _The American Indian_.

[201] Charles Alexander Eastman, _The Soul of an Indian, An
Interpretation_.

[202] H. B. Alexander, Introduction to _North American_, in _Mythology of
all Races_, Vol. I, p. xvi.

[203] One of the most careful and interesting accounts of the dual
worship of the sun and of the Christian God is in U. S. Geological
Survey, _Contributions to Ethnology_, Vol. IV, pp. 151, 152, by Lewis H.
Morgan, who had all his information from native men.

[204] “The conception of deities is quite clearly due to shamanistic
systematization.... It is very rare to find any belief in a single
supreme deity; when it does occur it is a thoroughly shamanistic
construction out of some popular belief.”—Franz Boas, _Mythology and
Folk-Lore of North American Indians_, _Journal of American Folk-Lore_,
Vol. XVII, 1914. See Appendix X.

[205] _Second Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology, p. 11.

[206] “The most highly developed priesthood north of Mexico is among
the Pueblos of New Mexico and Arizona where it controls the civil and
military branches of the tribe, transforming it into a theocratic
oligarchy.”—Swanton, _Handbook of American Indians_, Pt. II, p. 523.

[207] Frazer, _The Golden Bough_ (abridged edition, 1922), pp. 61-80.

[208] Kroeber, _Anthropology_, p. 368.

[209] The placing of “symbolic objects so that they convey the wishes of
the worshipper to the Powers,” is found only among the Pueblos (Franz
Boas, _Mythology and Folk-Tales, Journal of American Folk-Lore_, Vol.
XVII).

[210] See Appendix XI.

[211] Cushing, Fewkes, _et al._, _Second Annual Report_, Bureau of
American Ethnology. See Appendix XII.

[212] One of the finest petroglyphs as yet found is at Tscherige, on the
north side of the Pajarito Plateau. It is the plumed serpent, seven feet
long, etched on the rock by a stone tool.

[213] Brinton has an interesting passage on this subject in his _Myths of
the New World_.

[214] H. K. Haeberlein, _The Idea of Fertilization in Pueblos, Memoirs of
the Anthropological Association_.

[215] Pliny E. Goddard, _The Masked Dancers of the Apache_.

[216] Brinton, _Myths of the New World_, Chapter V; Fynn, _The American
Indian as a Product of Environment_, pp. 186-188.

[217] Mrs. Zelia Nuttall, _Old and New World Civilizations_. See Appendix
XIII.

[218] The _Shiwanna_ are masked dancers representing cloud spirits or
rain-makers. The oldest of all esoteric fraternities.

[219] Father Noël Dumarest, _Notes on Cochití_, translated and edited
by Elsie Clews Parsons in _Memoirs of the American Anthropological
Association_, Vol. VI, 1920.

[220] Dumarest, pp. 164, 165.

[221] A. M. Espinosa, articles on Witchcraft in _New Mexican Spanish
Folk-Lore, Journal of American Folk-Lore_, Vol. XXIII, 1910, and Vol.
XXIX, 1916.

[222] _Eleventh Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology, p. 73.

[223] In North America the shamanistic theory is purely animistic;
whether or not anthropomorphic seems to be relatively of small
consequence (Franz Boas, _Mythology and Folk-Tales, Journal of American
Folk-Lore_, Vol. VII).

[224] Paul Radin, _The Religion of the North American Indian_, _Journal
of American Folk-Lore_, Vol. XXVII, 1914.

[225] Bancroft, _History of the United States_, Vol. II, p. 423.

[226] In southeastern Europe ceremonies are observed to-day for the
purpose of making rain (Frazer, _The Golden Bough_, abridged edition, p.
69).

[227] Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, _Monograph on the Religious Life of
the Zuñi Child, Fifth Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology.

[228] H. B. Alexander, Introduction to _North American_, in _Mythology of
all Races_, Vol. I, p. xvi.

[229] See Cushing, _Creation of Corn, Annual Report_, Bureau of American
Ethnology, Vol. XIII, pp. 376, 377.

[230] _Journal of Ethnology and Archaeology_, Vol. II, p. 5.

[231] Introduction, _The Path on the Rainbow_, edited by G. W. Cronyn.

[232] Fasting is _par excellence_ the characteristic method of
superinducing religious feeling in order to bring about a state of
mind in which the world of sense-impressions was shut out and in which
auto-suggestion or hallucinations were predominant (Boas).

For one ceremony at Taos eighteen months of self-isolation is exacted of
the priests, when no message from family or home is permitted, whatever
the emergency.

[233] “Whenever anyone is being named anew, or assuming a new personality
or office he is invariably sprinkled or washed that he be cleanly
revealed and the better recommended in his new guise and character to the
gods and spirits invoked for the occasion.”—Cushing, _Thirteenth Annual
Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology, p. 335.

Hair-washing is an indispensable preliminary of almost all Pueblo
ceremonials. Hair-clipping of boys has been almost unknown. When, for
any reason it was done, the cuttings were burned; if thrown out, it was
thought that health and fortune had been scattered to the four winds.
But now that the Indian children are sent to American schools in distant
cities, one sees many boys and young men with the familiar “military cut.”

[234] Elsie Clews Parsons, _Anthropological Papers_, American Museum of
Natural History, Vol. XIX, Pt. 4, 1920.

[235] _American Anthropologist_, Elsie Clews Parsons, Vols. XVII, XVIII,
XIX, XX; _Man_, December, 1917, March, November, 1919; _Anthropological
Papers_, American Museum of Natural History, Vol. XIX, Pt. V; _Memoirs of
American Anthropological Association_, Vol. VI, No. 3, 1920; _Journal of
American Folk-Lore_, Vol. XXXI.

[236] _American Anthropologist_, Vol. XVI, 1914.

[237] _Eleventh Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology.

[238] Fewkes says that, while it is as yet impossible to determine
the priority of Tusayán or Keresan snake dances, he is positive that
the songs and incantations are more ancient than other elements of
that ceremonial. “Legends say that the Snake dance is the Cult of the
oldest people of Tusayán”; which means, among other things, “that the
original Tusayán Cult has kinship with that of the Keresan, the oldest
of the linguistic stocks of the pueblos.”—_Comparison of Sía and Tusayán
Ceremonials, American Anthropologist_, Vol. VIII, April, 1892, p. 132.

[239] Best description in G. W. James, New Mexico, _Land of Delight
Makers_.

[240] The officiating priest lives at Laguna, and goes to Ácoma only
for the Feast of St. Stephen and on All Souls’ Day; but he is at the
farm-colony of Acomita twice every month.

[241] _Journal of American Folk-Lore_, Vol. XXXI. Apparently a somewhat
movable _fiesta_, always announced four days in advance by the Saint’s
Crier. He also calls out that now it is time to bring in the wood. A
portion of whatever is cooked that day is thrown on the house fire for
_ahappa awan tewa_ (“the dead their day”). These words, by the way, are
Zuñi in origin.

[242] _Ibid._, Vol. XXII.

[243] _Journal of American Folk-Lore_, Vol. XXXI.

[244] This dance and ceremony are fully described by Dr. Elsie Clews
Parsons, in _American Anthropologist_, Vol. XX, N.S., 1918.

[245] _American Anthropologist_, Vol. XX, N. S., 1918.

[246] Stevenson, _Eleventh Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology,
pp. 14, 67.

[247] Stewart Culin in _Twenty-fourth Annual Report_, Bureau of American
Ethnology, 1902-03.

[248] Culin, pp. 119-124.

[249] Hodge, _American Anthropologist_, Vol. III, 1890. Owens, _Popular
Science Monthly_, Vol. XXXIX, 1891. Stevenson, _American Anthropologist_,
n.s., Vol. V, 1903.

[250] _The Gallo Race_, in Lummis, _A New Mexican David_.

[251] John G. Owens writes that on the banks of the Zuñi River “you will
behold a sight which for genuine mirth and romp will surpass any Eastern
park for children. The stream less than ten feet wide winds through a
sandy river-bed, which is the chief playground of the Zuñi child.” This
spirit of play stays with the boys in later life but the girls age very
rapidly—“the transition is from joyous frolicsome girlhood to sedate
sober womanhood” after they are 13 to 14 years old. (_Popular Science
Monthly_, Vol. XXXIX, 1891.)

[252] _American Anthropologist_, Vol. V, n.s., 1903.

[253] Culin, _Twenty-fourth Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology.

[254] Bandelier, _Final Report_, Pt. I, p. 295.

[255] Clark Wissler, _The American Indian_, p. 68.

[256] W. H. Holmes, _Fourth Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology,
1882-83.

[257] H. W. Henshaw, _Second Annual Report_, Bureau of American
Ethnology, p. 124.

[258] Boas thinks representative decorative art, and geometric decoration
are indications of two different sources of artistic activity which tend
to merge into a development of graphic and plastic arts.

[259] _Fourth Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology, p. 445.

[260] _Fourth Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology, p. 510
(section on Decorative Symbolism).

[261] _Ibid._

[262] Fewkes, _Twenty-second Annual Report_, and _Thirty-third Annual
Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology.

[263] _Second Annual Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology, 1880-81.

[264] See Hodge, _Handbook of American Indians_, 1902.

[265] See Wissler, _The American Indian_, pp. 239-241.

[266] President’s address, 1911, New York Academy of Sciences.




BIBLIOGRAPHY




BIBLIOGRAPHY


ABERT, JAMES W. Notes of a Military Reconnaissance, made in 1846-47 with
the “Army of the West,” 30th Congress, 1st Session, House Ex. Document 41.

ADAIR, JAMES. History of the American Indian, 1775.

ALEXANDER, HARTLEY. Manito Masks, 1925.

⸺ Introduction, and the section on the Pueblo Dwellers, in Vol. X,
Mythology of All Races, North American, 1920.

BANCROFT, H. H. Arizona and New Mexico, 1888.

⸺ Native Races, Vol. IV, 1875-76.

BANDELIER, A. F. Historical Introduction to Studies among the Sedentary
Indians of New Mexico, 1881.

⸺ Investigations among the Indians of the Southwestern United States
carried on from 1880 to 1885.

⸺ Montezuma of the Pueblo-Indians, in American Anthropologist, 1892.

BENAVIDES, FRAY ALONZO. The Memorial on New Mexico. Annotated by F.
W. Hodge and C. F. Lummis. Translated by Mrs. E. E. Ayer in Land of
Sunshine, Vols. XIII and XIV, 1916.

BOAS, FRANZ. Mythology and Folk-Tales of the North American Indian, in
Journal of American Folk-Lore, Vol. XXVII, 1914.

⸺ A History of the American Race, being the president’s address to
Academy of Sciences, New York, 1911.

⸺ Mythology and Folk-Tales of North American Indians, in Journal of
American Folk-Lore, Vol. XVII, 1914.

BOLTON, HERBERT EUGENE. Spanish Explorations in the Southwest, 1916.

⸺ Spanish Borderlands, 1921.

⸺ Father Escobar’s Relation of the Oñate Expedition to California, in
Catholic Historical Review, Vol. V, 1919.

⸺ The Mission as a Frontier Institution in the Spanish American Colonies,
in American Historical Review, October, 1917.

⸺ Athanase De Mézières and the Louisiana Frontier, 1914.

BOURKE, J. G. The Laws of Spain in their application to the American
Indian, in American Anthropologist, Vol. VII, 1894.

⸺ The Snake-Dance of the Moquis, 1884.

BRINTON, DANIEL A. Myths of the New World, 1865.

⸺ The American Race, 1901.

BURLIN, NATALIE CURTIS. The Indian’s Book, 1922.

COUES, ELLIOTT. On the Trail of a Spanish Pioneer, 1900.

CRANE, C. E. Painting the Town Red, in Scientific Monthly, June, 1924.

CRONYN, GEORGE W. The Path on the Rainbow, 1918.

CULIN, STEWART. Games of the North American Indians, in 24th Annual
Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, 1902-03.

CUSHING, F. H.

  Annual Reports, Bureau of American Ethnology

    Vol. XIII, Historical Résumé of Creation Myths, 1891-92.

    Vol. IV, Study of Pueblo Pottery, especially Decorative
    Symbolism, 1882-83.

    Vol. II, Zuñi Fetishes, 1880-81.

⸺ Zuñi Folk Tales, 1901.

DAVIS, W. W. H. The Spanish Conquest of New Mexico, 1869.

DOWNING, MARGARET B. San José de Ácoma, in Catholic World, Vol. CVIII,
1919.

DUMAREST, FATHER NOËL. Cochití, Memoirs of American Anthropological
Association, Vol. VI, No. 3, 1920. Translated and edited by E. C.
Parsons, with preface by Stewart Culin.

EASTMAN, CHARLES A. (Ohiyesa). The Soul of an Indian, 1911.

⸺ From the Deep Woods to Civilization, 1916.

ELLIS, REV. MYRON. The Thunder Bird, in American Anthropologist, October,
1889.

EMERSON, ELLEN RUSSELL. Book of the Dead, and Rain Ceremonials, in
American Anthropologist, Vol. VII, 1894.

EMORY, WILLIAM HELMSLEY. Military Reconnaissance in New Mexico, 1846-47.
30th Congress House Documents, 7, 41.

ESCALANTE, FRAY SILVESTRE VELEZDE. Letter of April, 1778, concerning the
Pueblo Revolt of 1680. Translated in Land of Sunshine, Vol. XII, March,
1900.

ESPINOSA, A. M. Witchcraft in New Mexico Spanish Folk-Lore, in Journal of
American Folk-Lore, Vols. XXIII, 1910, and XXIX, 1916.

⸺ Two Folk-tales, and Fifty-two Short Anecdotes or Fables, collected at
Acomita by Miss Matilda Allen, New Mexico Spanish Folk-lore, in Journal
of American Folk-Lore, Vol. XXVII, 1914.

ENGELHARDT, FATHER. Missions and Missionaries in California. Zephyrin
Franciscan Herald, February, 1920.

FEWKES, J. WALTER.

  Annual Reports, Bureau of American Ethnology

    Vol. XIII, Zuñi Creation Myths, 1891-92.

    Vol. XV, Tusayán Katchinas, 1893-94.

    Vol. XVI, Tusayán Snake Ceremonies (note at end on Ácoma),
    1894-95.

    Vol. XVII, Archaeological Expedition to Arizona in 1895. Pt. I,
    1895-96.

    Vol. XIX, Tusayán Migration Traditions. Pt. I, 1897-98.

    Vol. XIX, Flute and Snake Ceremonies. Pt. I, 1897-98.

    Vol. XXII, Two Summers’ Work in Pueblo Ruins. Pt. I, 1900-01.

    Vol. XXVIII, Casa Grande, Arizona, 1906-07.

⸺ Prehistoric Ruins of the Gila Valley, in Smithsonian Miscellaneous
Collection, Vol. LII, 1909.

⸺ Preliminary Report on Navajo National Monument, in Bulletin No. 50,
Bureau of American Ethnology, 1911.

  Journal of American Ethnology and Archaeology

    Vol. I, Ceremonials at Zuñi Pueblo.

    Vol. II, Ceremonials at Tusayán Pueblos, 1892.

    Vol. III, Documentary History of the Zuñi Tribe, 1892.

⸺ American Anthropologist, Vol. VIII, Comparison of Sía and Tusayán Snake
Ceremonials, 1895.

FRAZER, SIR J. G. The Golden Bough. Abridged edition, 1 vol., 1922.

FISKE, JOHN. The Discovery of America, 1892.

FYNN, A. J. The American Indian as Product of Environment, 1907.

GODDARD, PLINY E. Handbook of Indians of the Southwest, 1921.

⸺ Masked Dancers of the Apache, in the Holmes Memorial Volume, 1916.

GOLDENWEISER, A. A. Social Organization of the North American Indians, in
Journal of American Folk-Lore, Vols. XXVI-XXVIII, 1914.

GWYTHER, GEORGE M. D. Ceremony at Ácoma, in Overland Monthly, March, 1871.

HACKETT, C. W. Historical Documents Relating to New Mexico. Carnegie
Institution, 1923.

⸺ Revolt of the Pueblo Indians in New Mexico in 1680, in Southwestern
Quarterly, October, 1911.

⸺ Otermín’s Attempt to Reconquer New Mexico, 1681-82, in Old Santa Fé,
Vol. III, January, 1916.

HAEBERLEIN, H. K. The Idea of Fertilization in Pueblos, in Memoirs of
Anthropological Association, Vol. III, 1916.

HENSHAW, H. W. Animal Carvings from Mounds in the Mississippi Valley, in
2d Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, 1880-81.

HEWITT, E. L. Physiography of Rio Grande Valley in relation to Pueblo
Culture, 1913.

⸺ _Les Communautés Anciennes dans le Désert Americain_, 1908.

⸺ Antiquities of Jémez Plateau, in Smithsonian Bulletin No. 32, 1906.

HODGE, F. W. Handbook of American Indians, 1907-10.

⸺ Administrative Report, in 33d Annual Report, Bureau of American
Ethnology.

⸺ Katzímo the Enchanted, in Land of Sunshine, November, 1897.

⸺ The Ascent of the Enchanted Mesa, in Century Magazine, May, 1898.

  American Anthropologist

    Vol. VI, Prehistoric Irrigation in Arizona, 1893.

    Vol. VIII, The Early Navajo and Apache, 1895; First Discovered
    City of Cibalu, April, 1895.

    Vol. IX, No. 4, Pueblo Snake Ceremonies, 1896.

⸺ Spanish Explorers in Southern United States. (Narrative of Coronado
Expedition by Castañeda.) 1907.

HOLMES, W. H.

  Annual Reports, Bureau of American Ethnology

    Vol. IV, Origin and Development of Form and Ornament in Ceramic
    Art, 1882.

    Vol. VI, Textile Art, 1884-85.

    Vol. XIII, Prehistoric Textile Art of East United States,
    1891-92.

    Vol. XX, Pottery of East United States, 1898-99.

INDIAN AFFAIRS. Annual Report of Commissioner, 1854-1920.

JAMES, GEORGE WHARTON. New Mexico, Land of Delight Makers, 1920.

JUDSON, KATHERINE B. Myths and Legends of California and the Old
Southwest, 1916.

KEYES, CHARLES R. Wind-graved Mesas and Their Message, in Popular Science
Monthly, Vol. LXXXI, September, 1912.

KROEBER, A. L. Anthropology, 1923.

⸺ Zuñi Kin and Clan, Anthropological Papers, in American Museum of
Natural History, Vol. XVIII, Pt. 2, 1917.

⸺ Thoughts on Zuñi Religion, in Holmes Memorial Volume, 1916.

⸺ Introduction to American Indian Life, 1922.

LAUT, AGNES C. Through our Unknown Southwest, 1913.

LIBBEY, WILLIAM. A Disenchanted Mesa, in Harper’s Weekly, August 28, 1897.

⸺ The Enchanted Mesa, Princeton Press, August 21, 1897. Reviewed by
Lummis in Land of Sunshine; note by Hodge in Land of Sunshine, October
and November, 1897.

LOWIE, R. H. Ceremonialism in North America, in American Anthropologist,
Vol. XVI, 1914.

LUMMIS, C. L. A New Mexican David.

⸺ _El Poco Tiempo_, 1921.

⸺ Spanish Pioneers, 1920.

⸺ Translation of Perea, in Land of Sunshine, November and December, 1901.

⸺ Translation of Zárate Salmerón, in Land of Sunshine, Vols. XI and XII.

⸺ Mesa, Cañon, and Pueblo, 1925.

LUNDGREN, FERNAND. Notes on Old Mesa Life, in Century Magazine, May, 1898.

MECHAM, J. LLOYD. The Martyrdom of Father Juan de Santa María, in
Catholic Historical Review, October, 1920.

⸺ Translation of Gallegos from MS, in Bolton Collection.

MINDELEFF, COSMOS. Dwellings of North American Indians, in 17th Annual
Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, Pt. 2, 1894-95.

⸺ Localization of Tusayán Clans, in 19th Annual Report, Bureau of
American Ethnology, Pt. 2, 1897-98.

MINDELEFF, H. VICTOR. Pueblo Architecture, in 8th Annual Report, Bureau
of American Ethnology, 1886-87.

MORGAN, LEWIS H. Indian Migrations.

⸺ Houses and House-Life of American Aborigines, 1881.

⸺ Ancient Society, 1912.

MÜLLER, MAX. Chips from a German Workshop, Vol. I (_de Shaman_), pp.
233-234.

NORDENSKIÖLD, GUSTAV E. A. Cliff-Dwellers of the Mesa Verde. Southwestern
Colorado, translated by D. L. Morgan, 1895.

NUTTALL, MRS. ZELIA. The Swastika, in Old and New World Civilizations,
1901.

OWENS, JOHN G. Some Zuñi Games, in Popular Science Monthly, Vol. XXXIX,
1891.

PARSONS, ELSIE CLEWS.

  American Anthropologist

    Vol. XVII, Links Between Morality and Religion in Early
    Culture, 1915.

    Vol. XVIII, Holding Back in Crisis Ceremonialism. The Zuñi,
    A’Doshle and Suüke, 1916.

    Vol. XIX, Ceremonial Friendship at Zuñi. War God Shrines at
    Laguna and Zuñi, 1917.

    Vol. XX, Notes on Ácoma and Laguna, 1918.

  Journal of American Folk-Lore

    Vol. XXX, All Souls’ Day at Zuñi, Ácoma and Laguna, 1917.

    Vol. XXXI, Nativity Myth at Laguna and Zuñi, Pueblo-Indian
    Folk-Tales, probably of Spanish Provenience, 1918.

  Man

    Vol. XVII, The Antelope Clan in Keresan Custom and Myth, 1917.

    Vol. XIX, Mothers and Children at Laguna; Mothers and Children
    at Zuñi, 1919.

⸺ Laguna Genealogies, Anthropological Memoirs of The American Museum of
Natural History, Vol. XIX, Pt. V, 1923.

⸺ Editor, American Indian Life.

⸺ Editor and Translator, Notes on Cochití, New Mexico, by Father Noël
Dumarest, Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association, Vol. VI,
1920.

PEREA, PADRE FRAY ESTÉVAN DE. _Verdedera Relación_ of the Magnifical
Conversion of New Mexico, 1632-33. Translated by Lummis, in Land of
Sunshine, November and December, 1901.

POWELL, J. W. Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology.

⸺ Mythology of North American Indians.

⸺ Foreword to Cushing’s Zuñi Folk-Tales, 1901.

⸺ American Anthropologist, Vol. II. United States, 1900.

PRINCE, J. BRADFORD. Concise History of New Mexico, 1912.

⸺ The Mission Churches of New Mexico, 1915.

RADIN, PAUL. Religion of the North American Indians, in Journal of
American Folk-Lore, Vol. XXVII, 1914.

READ, BENJAMIN W. Illustrated History of New Mexico, 1912.

RUSKIN, JOHN. Queen of the Air. (For serpent worship.)

RYAN, MARAH ELLIS. The Flute of the Gods, 1909.

SHORT, JOHN T. North Americans of Antiquity, 1882.

SPIER, LESLIE. An Outline for Chronology of Zuñi Ruins, in
Anthropological Papers, American Museum of Natural History, Vol. XVIII,
Pt. III, 1917.

⸺ Havasupai Days, in American Indian Life, 1922. Edited by Elsie Clews
Parsons.

STEVENSON, MRS. M. C. The Sía, in 11th Annual Report, Bureau of American
Ethnology, 1892.

⸺ The Zuñi, in 23d Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, 1901-02.

SWANTON, J. R. Some Practical Aspects of the Study of Myths, in Journal
of American Folk-Lore, Vol. XXIII, 1910.

⸺ Handbook of American Indians. Pt. II.

TURNER, F. J. The Frontier in American History, 1920.

TWITCHELL, R. E. Leading Facts in New Mexican History, 1911.

⸺ Spanish Archives of New Mexico, Library of Congress, Washington, D. C.,
1914.

VARGAS, DON DIEGO DE. Extracts from Journal, in Old Santa Fé, 1914.

VETANCUR. _Crónica y Menológio Seráfico_, Vol. IV.

VILLAGRÁ, DON GASPAR DE. _Historia de la Nueva Mexico_, 1610.
Republished, 1900; fragmentary translations in Read and Bancroft.

WALLACE, MRS. LEW. The Land of the Pueblos, 1889.

WARING, J. B. The Ceramic Art in Remote Ages, 1874.

WATERMAN, T. T. The Explanatory Element in the Folk-Tales of the North
American Indians, in Journal of American Folk-Lore, Vol. XVII, 1917.

WINSHIP, G. P. The Coronado Expedition, 1540-42, in 14th Annual Report,
Bureau of American Ethnology, Pt. I, 1895.

⸺ Journey of Coronado, Trail-Maker’s Series, 1904.

WISSLER, CLARK. The American Indian, 1922.

ZÁRATE-SALMERÓN, FRAY GERÓNIMO. _Relación_ of events in New Mexico,
1538-1626. Translated by Lummis, in Land of Sunshine, Vols. XI and XII.




INDEX




INDEX


  Abert, Lieutenant, cited on friendly attitude of Ácomas, 140.

  Ácoma (Peñol), 14-19, 218;
    dwellings on, 19-21;
    industries, 21-22, 159;
    cisterns on, 25-26, 122;
    trails, 27-29;
    church, 34-39, 128;
    historical evidences of, 56, 58, 60-61, 63;
    Espéjo’s description of, 65;
    Oñate’s visit, 74;
    taken by the Spaniards, 80-85;
    rebuilding of, 88-89;
    Spanish administration of, 93, 97;
    aloofness and isolation, 95, 140;
    patron saint of, 104;
    size of, in 1680, 115;
    not active in revolt of that year, 115;
    the coming of Vargas (1692), 118-122;
    uprising and defeat (1696), 123-126;
    hostility to the mission, etc., 127-128;
    dispute with Laguna over painting of San José, 128-132;
    education in, under the Federal government, 139-140;
    the Bursum Bill, 143,
      and the appeal of the Ácomas, 144-146;
    racial origin relationships, 157, 162-164, 197;
    origin of pueblo, 157-159;
    rock-paintings and carvings at, 161;
    details concerning, in creation story, 164;
    present population, 164;
    folk-tales from, 198-208;
    corn clans of, 247;
    ritual celebrations at, 253-260.
    _See also_ St. Stephen, Trails.

  Ácoma Indians. _See_ Pueblo Indians.

  Acomita, farm-lands at, 33;
    summer migration to, of Ácoma (Pueblo) Indians, 159.

  Agüelo (grandfather), 223.

  A-Ko-Kai-Obi, Hopi name for Ácoma, 163.

  All Souls’ Day, 257.

  Alvarado, first white man to see Ácoma, 16, 57-60.

  Amaya, Doña Casilda de, first white woman to enter New Mexico, 64.

  Animism, 242.

  Apache Indian, influence of, in the Southwest, 9 n.

  Architecture, among the “Pueblo Arts,” 156.

  Art, Pueblo, 156, 161;
    sand (dry) painting, 163.
    _See_ also Architecture, Pottery.

  Awanyu, plumed serpent, 233.

  Ayeta, Father, 113;
    part played by, in Pueblo Revolt of 1680, 114-115.


  Bibliography, 299.

  Bird cult, 233-234.

  Bolton, Dr. H. E., acknowledgment to, viii;
    first use of Espéjo’s narrative, 65;
    unpublished translation of an anonymous diarist, 85-87;
    missions as agents of the State, 88, 92.

  Buffalo, “humpbacked cow,” discovery of, 58, 61.

  Burial, among the Pueblo Indians, 39 and n., 40-42.

  Bursum Bill, 143-144.


  Cacique (Kasik), tenure of office, 186;
    duties, 186-187, 224;
    chosen by, and from Antelope Clan, 188, 189.

  Caypa (San Juan de los Caballeros), 73.

  Cedar Brew, in purification ritual, 41.

  Ceremonies (Ceremonials) among the Pueblo Indians, color scarlet in
        relation to, 39 n.;
    election, United States represented in, 135,
      description of, 189-190;
    effect of white man’s contempt for, 143;
    purpose, 152, 247-250;
    Snake, 163, 233, 246, 255;
    sacerdotal functions of war chiefs, 187;
    prerogatives of Antelope Clan, 188;
    purification (1864), 190,
      story of, 191-192;
    Santu, 221-222;
    christening, 222;
    priesthoods, 229,
       origin, 231;
    Painted Altar, 231;
    fertilization, psychological characteristic of, 234-235, 263;
    underlying motives, 245-246;
    classification of, 247-248;
    hunts, 252;
    friendship, 255;
    All Souls’ Day, 257;
    Christmas, 258;
    uses of pottery in, 276.

  Chamuscado, Francisco Sanchez, with Rodríguez’ expedition, 62.

  _Cheani_, 40, 40 n. 2.

  Child-sacrifice, 220.

  Children in the Pueblos, christening of, 222-223;
    obedience of, 223;
    participation in dance, 260.

  Christianity, Indians’ attitude toward, 132.

  Cíbola, discovery of, 61.

  Clan, or Kinship, priority of, in pueblo social organization, 177,
        180;
    clans grouped in pairs, 178;
    Kroeber’s differentiation of family and clan, 178;
    relation of clan to fraternity, 180-182.

  Clans, ranking of, 188;
    maternal, and exogamous among Ácomas, 221.

  Cliff dwellings, _vs._ those on level soil, priority of, 151.

  _Colchones_, 22.

  Color, scarlet, relation to burial wrappings and ceremonials, 39 n. 1.

  Color-symbols, of respective six “points of the compass,” 214, 247.

  Colorado River, discovery of, 61.

  Corchado, Fray Andres, missionary to Ácoma, 93.

  Corn (maize), ceremonial motive, 246.

  Corn Clans of Ácoma, 247.

  Coronado, expedition of, 57-61.

  Creation story, 212-216;
    Ácoma detail in, 164.

  Cross, symbol, 237-239;
    below the Rock of Ácoma, 239.

  Culture-hero myth, 216.


  December ceremonial at Ácoma, a complex of Christian and pagan
        customs, 258-260.

  Diary, account of Oñate’s expedition, 85-86.

  Duality of the American Indian, 224, 235.


  Early Chroniclers, 14.

  Education of the Pueblo Indian:
    under the padres, 138;
    under Mexico, 138;
    under United States government, 139-140.

  El Paso, the Crossing, first home of European drama in the
        Southwest, 72.

  Encomenderos, and encomienda system, 90.

  Espéjo, Antonio de, expeditions of, 64-67;
    opened third pathway to New Mexico, 66.

  Estévan, negro (“Black Mexican”), 52-53;
    death of, 54.

  Estufas, 45;
    educational and council uses of, 48;
    distinction between, and _Kiva_, 48-49.


  Family, differentiated from clan, 178-179;
    the family a partnership, 184;
    marriage and divorce, 184-185.

  Fasts, 248.

  Federal government. _See_ United States.

  Fetishes, strong influence of, in Pueblo Indian organization,
        182-183, 230-234.

  Folk-tales defined, 194;
    scanty contribution of Pueblo Indians, 196;
    of Ácoma, 198-208.
    _See also_ Myths.

  Four, the number a sacred symbol, 236-237.

  Fraternity (phratry), relation of, to clan, 180-182;
    function of, 181.


  Gallo Race, 268-269.

  Games, Indians’ devotion to, 262-263;
    underlying socio-religious significance, 263-264, 271;
    purpose and periods of, 263-264;
    disciplinary training of, 264-265;
    two kinds of—chance and dexterity, 265-267, 269;
    of native origin, 266;
    implements used in, and derivation of, 266;
    ball-race, 267;
    shinny (by women only), 268;
    Gallo race, 268;
    cat’s cradle, 270.

  Gaming, Indians’ passion for, 262-263.

  _Gave_, 21.

  Grand Cañon, discovery of, 61.


  _Ha-chamoni_, 40 n. 3.

  _Hamaha_, 31.

  Háwikuh, 55-56.

  _Hewe_, 21 n. 2.

  _Hoinawe_, 41.

  Hopi Indians, racial relationships, 161-164.


  Inscription Rock, 6.


  _Gonad del Muerto_, 96.


  _Kahera_, 32.

  Kasik, Keres form of Cacique, 42 n. 1.
    _See also_ Cacique.

  K’at’sina or Katsina, or Cachina, 186, 235.

  Katzímo (Enchanted mesa or Mesa Encantada), the “accursed,” 15, 118,
        159, 166;
    legend of, 167-168;
    ritual performances at, 169-170;
    present-day knowledge of, 170-175;
    ascents of, by Hodge and by Libbey, 171-174;
    elevation of, 173;
    proofs of human occupation of, 175.

  Keres (Queres), kindred nations, 157, n. 1;
    priesthoods of, 229.

  Keresans, racial origin, 157, 161-164.

  Kinship, place of, in pueblo social organization, 177-180.

  Kisi, description of, 49.

  Kivas, 45-49;
    number, 45;
    forms, 46;
    signification of, 46;
    educational uses, 47-48;
    distinction between, and estufas, 48;
    not temples, 49.

  _Komanina_ (long house), 260.


  Laguna, 15,
      founded, 129;
    church, decoration of, 36;
    hostility to missionary, 127;
    rivalry with Ácoma over painting of San José, 128-132;
    Santu a male deity in her cult, 221.

  Lightning, symbol of serpent, 232.

  Lincoln, President, presentation of official cane to Indian Pueblo
        governors, 134-135.


  Maize. _See_ Corn.

  Mendoza, Antonio de, Viceroy, 52.

  Mesa Prieta, 27 n. 2.

  Mesas, 4 n.

  Metates, corn-grinding trough, 21.

  Monster Viper, Myth, 219.

  Montezuma, god of the Pueblos, 216 n. 3, 218.

  Myths, 209-220;
    universality of a myth, 209;
    explanatory: (1) inclusive, (2) particularistic, 210-211;
    ritualization of, 212-215;
    culture-hero, 216;
    in connection with children, 221-224.


  Navajo Indian, the, 9;
    Commissioner Leupp’s comment on white man’s attitude toward, 142.

  Navajo Reservation, 7.

  New Mexico, formal Spanish possession of, 72;
    missions and missionaries in, 94-96, 102;
    made a _custodio_ and named for San Pablo, 94;
    pueblos of, 135.
    _See also_ Pueblo Revolt of 1680, Sedentary Indians, United States.

  Niza, Marcos de, 52, 54, 56.


  Oñate, 6 n.;
    founder of New Mexico, 67;
    expedition of, 69-85;
    diary, 85, 86;
    his marriage connections, 69;
    official titles, 71;
    revenge taken on Ácomas, 79-85.


  Padilla, Fray Juan de, proto-martyr of the north, 57.

  Painted altar, ceremonial trait, 231.

  Parentalia, 248.

  Pecos (Cicuyé), 57, 218.

  Peñol, “the Crag.” _See_ Ácoma.

  Pictographs, expression of Pueblo art, 156.

  Piki, 21 n. 2.

  Plains Indians, contrasted with Sedentary Indians, 155, 156.

  Popé, Indian instigator of Pueblo Revolt of 1680, 107-110;
    his chief assistants, 109;
    brief victory, 116;
    death, 117.

  Pottery, art of, a determinator of time relations, 150;
    evidences of, at Katzímo, 171, 174;
    Thunder Bird motif in, 210;
    historical sketch of, in the Southwest, 272;
    the three pre-Columbian groups, 273-274;
    first incentive toward, 274;
    development of, 275, 278;
    use of color, 277-278;
    vessels set aside for ceremonial uses, 276;
    personality ascribed to, 279;
    decoration of, free-hand, but not haphazard, 280;
    fuel for firing, 281;
    importance of, in search for race origins, 284.

  Pueblo, significance of word, 149 n. 1;
    Terraced, 19.

  Pueblo (Ácoma) Indians, compared with Plains Indians, 10, 12, 217;
    dwellings of, 19-20;
    separateness of, family or clan, 20;
    industries, 21-22, 282;
    dress, 23-25;
    self-respect, 31;
    cleanliness, 33;
    evidences of American influence, 33;
    lack of domestic animals, 155;
    annual summer migration to Acomita, 159;
    clans, maternal and exogamous, 221;
    children, birth, christening, 221-223.

  Political and civil organization, 50;
    relation to Federal government, 135;
    republican in form, 177;
    theocratic, 182, 185;
    property relations, 182;
    based on fetishism, 182-183;
    officials and their duties, 185-189;
    election of officers, and their installation, 189-190.
    _See also_ Ceremonies, Education, Lincoln, United States, World War.

  Pueblo Indians, Social organization, in Stone Age, at time of Spanish
        Conquest, 277.
    _See also_ Ácoma, Burial, Ceremonies, Education, Myths, etc.

  Pueblo region, extent of, 148.

  Pueblo Revolt of 1680, 106-117;
    in 1696, 123-126.
    _See also_ Ayeta.


  Ramírez, Fray Juan, 28;
    the church he built, 34-39, 103;
    Apostle of Ácoma, 96;
    brief sketch of, 99-102;
    death and burial, 104.

  Rituals (religious beliefs), purification, 41, 247;
    foot-race, 55;
    sand mosaics, 163;
    myths ritualized, 212-215, 221-224;
    increase of children, 221;
    elaborate organization of, 225;
    myth and religion, 226-227;
    sun-worship, 227;
    contemplative quality of, 227;
    Nature, the Great Spirit, 228;
    priesthoods, 229;
    classification of, 247-248;
    at Ácoma, 252-253, 255;
    Smoking an essential element, 50, 274.
    _See also_ Bird, Ceremonies, Estufa, Fetish, Katzímo, Kisi, Kiva,
        Serpent, etc.

  Rodríguez, Fray Agustin, expedition of, 62-64.


  St. Stephen (San Estévan), church of, 34, 103, 104, 121;
    feast-day of, 256.
    _See also_ Ramírez, Vargas.

  Salt, need of, a motive for migration, 148.

  San Gabriel, headquarters of Oñate, 89.

  San José, miracle-working painting of, 36, 130;
    rivalry for, between Ácoma and Laguna, 128, 132.

  San Juan de los Caballeros (Caypa), second permanent colony in the
        United States, 73.

  Sierra de San Mateo, mountain sacred to Keres people, 27.

  San Pablo (New Mexico), 94.

  San Pedro, patron saint of Ácoma church for short time, 37, 128.

  Sanchez, Mrs. N. V., acknowledgment to, 196.

  Sand painting (dry mosaics), 164.

  Santa Fé, founded, 89.

  Santa María, fate of, 63.

  Santu Cult, male deity, 221.

  _Saukin_, Ácoma word for friend, 255.

  Sedentary Indians of New Mexico, 14 n.;
    contrast between and the nomad or Plains Indians, 155-156.

  Serpent cult, 231-233.

  Shamans (Shamanism), 241-242, 248.

  Shoshonean, racial relationships, 161.

  Sía (Zía, Tsía), nearest of kin to Ácoma as tribe, 157, 158.

  Si-pa-pu, place of emergence for all created beings, 40, 41, 46, 215;
    “north of Taos,” 167 n., 234;
    the path to heaven, 215.

  Six “points of the compass,” 213-214;
    separate color-symbols of, 214.

  Smoking and ceremonials, 57, 274.

  Songs, universal in Indian life and worship, 195, 250;
    corn-grinding, 21;
    of the corn-people, 195.

  Spanish administration of the New World, 90-93.

  Spier, Dr. Leslie, acknowledgment to, viii.

  Swastika, 238.

  Sweat-bath, 248.


  Mt. Taylor (Spi-nat), 27 n. 1.

  Thunder-Bird, myth of, 210.

  Time, the reckoning of, 253.

  To-ya-la-na, Thunder Mountain, shrine of the Zuñi, 261.

  Trails from the mesa of Ácoma, 27-29;
    Burro, 29;
    Camino del Padre, constructed by Ramírez, 104;
    Deadman’s, 28, 192;
    Ladder, 23;
    New, 29;
    Runner’s, 28, 192;
    Split, 27, 29;
    Staircase, 29.

  Treviño, Spanish governor of New Mexico, 107.

  Tupatú, Popé’s assistant in 1680, 109, 117.


  United States, the second permanent settlement in, 73;
    relations with Pueblo government represented in election ceremony,
        134, 135;
    Reports of Indian Commissioners quoted, 136-139, 142;
    educational statistics, 139-140;
    increasing hostility and misunderstanding between the two, 140-144,
        254;
    danger and tragedy in the Bursum Bill, 143-144;
    “Appeal of the Ácomas,” 144-146.

  _Utinat_, 24.


  Vaca, Cabeza de, 51.

  Vargas, General Diego de, reconquest of New Mexico, 117-126;
    submission of Ácoma to, 118-122;
    his description of the shrine of St. Stephen, 121;
    final conquest of, 125-126.

  _Vigas_, 20, 27, 38.

  Villagrá, Gaspar de, soldier and poet, 69-70;
    adventure at Ácoma, 75-76, 82, 84;
    his famous leap, 30.


  Walpi, 11, 255;
    the tie between, and Ácoma, 162.

  Witchcraft, 153.

  Witches, 239.

  World-War, and the Pueblo Indians, 137-138, 215.


  Zaldívar, Vicente de, leader of attack on Ácoma, 80-85.

  Zárate Salmerón, Father, missionary and historian, 93-94;
    visits Ácoma, 93.

  Zuñi (and Ácoma), 198;
    Zuñi name for Keres, means “Drinkers of the Dew,” 157.

  Zutucapán, cacique of Ácoma, 75-76;
    plans foiled to murder Oñate, 76;
    attack on Spaniards with Zaldívar, 77-78.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ÁCOMA, THE SKY CITY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.