AGRICOLA




                        CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
                           C. F. CLAY, MANAGER
                       LONDON: FETTER LANE, E.C. 4

                              [Illustration]

                       NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN CO.
                    BOMBAY   }
                    CALCUTTA } MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD.
                    MADRAS   }
                TORONTO: THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, LTD.
                     TOKYO: MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA

                           ALL RIGHTS RESERVED




                                 AGRICOLA

                  A STUDY OF AGRICULTURE AND RUSTIC LIFE
                    IN THE GRECO-ROMAN WORLD FROM THE
                         POINT OF VIEW OF LABOUR

                                    BY
                             W E HEITLAND MA
                       FELLOW OF ST JOHN’S COLLEGE

                                CAMBRIDGE
                         AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS
                                   1921




      _‘Inspect the basis of the social pile:_
    _Inquire,’ said I, ‘how much of mental power_
    _And genuine virtue they possess who live_
    _By bodily toil, labour exceeding far_
    _Their due proportion, under all the weight_
    _Of that injustice which upon ourselves_
    _Ourselves entail.’ Such estimate to frame_
    _I chiefly looked (what need to look beyond?)_
    _Among the natural abodes of men,_
    _Fields with their rural works; recalled to mind_
    _My earliest notices; with these compared_
    _The observations made in later youth,_
    _And to that day continued—For, the time_
    _Had never been when throes of mighty Nations_
    _And the world’s tumult unto me could yield,_
    _How far soe’er transported and possessed,_
    _Full measure of content; but still I craved_
    _An intermingling of distinct regards_
    _And truths of individual sympathy_
    _Nearer ourselves._

                                        WORDSWORTH, _Prelude_, book XIII.




PREFACE


Very few words are needed here, for the book is meant to explain its own
scope. I have only to thank those to whose kindness I am deeply indebted.
Professor Buckland was so good as to help me when I was striving to
utilize the evidence of the Roman jurists. Chapter XLIX in particular
owes much to his genial chastisement. On chapters II and LXI Mr G G
Coulton has given me most valuable criticism. Yet I thank these gentlemen
with some reluctance, fearing that I may seem to connect their names
with errors of my own. Mr T R Glover kindly read chapter XXIX. Professor
Housman called my attention to the ‘Farmer’s Law,’ and kindly lent me
Mr Ashburner’s articles, to which I have referred in Appendix B. To all
these, and to the Syndics of the University Press for undertaking the
publication of this unconventional work, I hereby express my sincere
gratitude. My reasons for adopting the method followed in this book are
given on pages 5-6 and 468.

                                                              W E HEITLAND

CAMBRIDGE

_August 1920_




TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                                     PAGES

                              INTRODUCTORY

        I. EVIDENCE                                                    1-7

       II. LAND AND LABOUR                                            7-15

                       AUTHORITIES IN DETAIL—GREEK

      III. THE ILIAD AND ODYSSEY                                     16-22

       IV. HESIOD, WORKS AND DAYS                                    22-24

        V. STRAY NOTES FROM EARLY POETS                              24-26

       VI. TRACES OF SERFDOM IN GREEK STATES                         26-28

      VII. HERODOTUS                                                 28-30

     VIII. THE TRAGEDIANS

             Aeschylus and Sophocles                                 31-33

             Euripides                                               33-37

       IX. THE ‘CONSTITUTION OF ATHENS’ OR ‘OLD OLIGARCH’            37-40

        X. ARISTOPHANES                                              40-48

       XI. THUCYDIDES                                                48-52

      XII. XENOPHON                                                  53-61

     XIII. THE COMIC FRAGMENTS                                       61-65

      XIV. EARLY LAWGIVERS AND THEORISTS                             65-70

       XV. PLATO                                                     70-80

      XVI. THE EARLIER ATTIC ORATORS                                 80-85

     XVII. ARISTOTLE                                                85-103

    XVIII. THE LATER ATTIC ORATORS                                 103-112

      XIX. THE MACEDONIAN PERIOD AND THE LEAGUES                   112-130

             Polybius etc—Theocritus—Plautus and
               Terence—Inscriptions—Letter of Philip V
               to Larisa—Evidence preserved by Plutarch,
               Diodorus, Livy, etc

                       ROME—EARLY PERIOD TO 200 BC

       XX. THE TRADITIONS COMBINED AND DISCUSSED                   131-149

             [No contemporary authors]

      XXI. ABSTRACT OF CONCLUSIONS                                 149-150

                           ROME—MIDDLE PERIOD

     XXII. INTRODUCTORY GENERAL VIEW OF PERIOD 200 BC-180 AD       151-164

             Growth of slavery—Slave risings, etc

    XXIII. CATO                                                    164-173

     XXIV. AGRICULTURE IN THE REVOLUTIONARY PERIOD                 174-177

      XXV. VARRO                                                   178-187

     XXVI. CICERO                                                  187-199

    XXVII. SALLUST ETC                                             199-202

                             ROME—THE EMPIRE

   XXVIII. AGRICULTURE AND AGRICULTURAL LABOUR UNDER THE ROMAN
             EMPIRE. GENERAL INTRODUCTION                          203-212

                          ROME—AUGUSTUS TO NERO

     XXIX. HORACE AND VERGIL                                       213-241

      XXX. THE ELDER SENECA ETC                                    241-243

     XXXI. SENECA THE YOUNGER                                      244-248

    XXXII. LUCAN, PETRONIUS, ETC                                   248-250

   XXXIII. COLUMELLA                                               250-269

                AGE OF THE FLAVIAN AND ANTONINE EMPERORS

    XXXIV. GENERAL INTRODUCTION                                    270-274

             Note on emigration from Italy                         274-275

     XXXV. MUSONIUS                                                275-280

    XXXVI. PLINY THE ELDER                                         281-287

   XXXVII. TACITUS                                                 287-292

             Note on an African inscription                            293

  XXXVIII. FRONTINUS                                               294-296

    XXXIX. INSCRIPTIONS RELATIVE TO _ALIMENTA_                     296-300

       XL. DION CHRYSOSTOM                                         300-303

      XLI. NEW TESTAMENT WRITERS                                   303-305

     XLII. MARTIAL AND JUVENAL                                     305-317

    XLIII. PLINY THE YOUNGER                                       317-325

     XLIV. SUETONIUS ETC                                           325-328

      XLV. APULEIUS                                                328-335

                         COMMODUS TO DIOCLETIAN

     XLVI. GENERAL INTRODUCTION                                    336-342

    XLVII. THE AFRICAN INSCRIPTIONS                                342-353

   XLVIII. DISCUSSION OF THE SAME                                  353-361

     XLIX. THE JURISTS OF THE _DIGEST_                             361-378

        L. THE LATER COLONATE, ITS PLACE IN ROMAN HISTORY          378-384

             Additional notes                                          385

                             FROM DIOCLETIAN

       LI. GENERAL INTRODUCTION                                    386-399

      LII. LIBANIUS                                                399-402

     LIII. SYMMACHUS                                               402-409

      LIV. AMMIANUS                                                409-415

       LV. CLAUDIAN                                                415-417

      LVI. VEGETIUS                                                417-419

                            CHRISTIAN WRITERS

     LVII. LACTANTIUS                                              420-422

    LVIII. SULPICIUS SEVERUS                                       422-423

      LIX. SALVIAN                                                 423-426

       LX. APOLLINARIS SIDONIUS                                    426-432

      LXI. CONCLUDING CHAPTER                                      432-459

                                APPENDIX

                       SOME BYZANTINE AUTHORITIES

        A. The _Geoponica_                                         460-462

        B. The ‘Farmer’s Law’                                      462-464

        C. Modern books, a few interesting extracts and references  465-46

        D. List of some of the works found useful in this inquiry  468-471

                                 INDICES

        I. GENERAL                                                 472-479

       II. WORDS AND PHRASES                                       479-482

      III. PASSAGES CITED                                          483-489

       IV. MODERN AUTHORITIES                                      489-490

        V. COUNTRIES, PLACES AND PEOPLES                           490-492




INTRODUCTORY


I. EVIDENCE.

The inquiry of which the results are set forth in these pages was
undertaken in the endeavour to satisfy my own mind on a very important
question in the history of the past. Circumstances have compelled me to
interest myself in the civilization of the Greco-Roman world. And it has
always been a painful disadvantage to students of the ‘classical’ systems
that the available record neither provides adequate labour-statistics
nor furnishes a criticism of existing labour-conditions from the point
of view of the handworkers. Accustomed as we are nowadays to continual
agitations for increase of wages and reduction of working hours, with
centuries of strange experience in the working of Poor-laws, we are
in no danger of undervaluing the importance of the wage-earner in our
social fabric. We are rather in danger of forgetting other (and perhaps
not less vital) considerations, under pressure of the material claims
of the labourer and his hire. Power goes by votes; the handworker is
now a voter; and the voice of the handworker is loud in the land. No
scheme is too wild to find advocates; and those who venture to assert
the right of invention, organization and thrift to superior recognition
as public benefits often think it necessary to adopt an apologetic tone.
Now it may be that this is a passing phase, and that the so-called
‘working-class’—that is, handworkers for wages—will come to see that
the civilization whose comforts they enjoy, and whose discomforts they
resent, does not wholly depend upon the simple repeated acts of the
handworkers themselves. Perhaps there are already signs of some such
reaction. But, if so, the reaction must be voluntary; for no power exists
in this country to constrain the handworker to take reasonable views, in
short to face facts. In these words I am not implying any denial of the
reasonableness of many of his claims. To offer an opinion on questions of
more or less is no business of mine.

But, when we compare modern industries in general with those of the
ancient world, we find ourselves in presence of a very different
situation. The largest scale of operations attainable in antiquity seems
small and crude by the side of recent achievements, for instance the
building of the Pyramids compared with the Panama canal. Machinery,
transport, and scientific discovery in general, have made it possible
to carry out colossal undertakings with comparative ease and without
wholesale destruction of human life. The greatest works of the ancients
are for the most part silent witnesses to the ruthless employment of
forced labour, either that of captives or bought slaves or that of the
impressed subjects of an autocrat. Mere brute force, applied in unlimited
quantity[1] with callous indifference to the sufferings of the toilers,
was the chief means at disposal: mechanical invention had got so far
as to render possible some tasks that without it could not have been
performed at all. It gave extended effect to the mass of forced labour,
and there it stopped, for we have no reason to think that it improved the
labourer’s lot. The surviving evidence as to the condition[2] of slaves
in mines and factories enables us to form some faint notion of the human
wastage resulting from the cruel forced-labour system. We may then state
the position briefly thus: to attempt great enterprises was only possible
through the crude employment of labour in great masses: the supply of
this labour was, or appeared to be, procurable only by compulsion: and
compulsion was operative through the institution of slavery or the
passive submission of cowed populations to the will of despots. But if
slavery promoted large-scale enterprise, surely large-scale enterprise
tended to establish slavery in the form of forced labour more firmly than
ever. In the modern world the necessity of employing free labour has
stimulated scientific invention, in mechanical and other departments, the
tendency of which is to require greater intellectual[3] development in
the labourer, and in the long run to furnish him with effective means of
asserting his own freedom.

Under modern conditions, the gradual displacement of small handicraftsmen
by the growth of great capitalistic combinations is going on, perhaps
not always for good. The public accept this result as fate. And, if
economy in production and prime-cost cheapness are the only things worth
considering, it is not easy to condemn the process. But events are
steadily demonstrating the fear once entertained, that handworkers in
general would find their position weakened thereby, to be groundless. If
the independent craftsman has lost ground, the wage-earning journeyman
has gained. We need not follow out this topic in detail, but note the
contrast presented by the ancient world. The ‘small man’ in crafts and
trades was able to hold his own, for without steam-power the capitalist
was not strong enough to suppress him. In a small way he was something
of a capitalist himself, and commonly owned slave-apprentices. His part
in ancient civilization was undoubtedly far more important than it
appears in literature: for he ministered to the ordinary needs of every
day, while literature, then as now and more than now, chiefly recorded
the exceptional. When we turn to the wage-earner, who earns a living by
hiring out his bodily powers to an employer, we are dealing with a wholly
different class. These are the free men who in a slave-holding society
have to compete with the slave. In the course of the present inquiry
we must keep a sharp look-out for every reference or allusion to such
persons in the department of agriculture, and in particular note numerous
passages in which the status of labourers cannot be inferred with
certainty from the language. But the importance of this special point is
of course not confined to agriculture.

I have chosen to limit my inquiry to the case of agriculture for these
reasons. First, because it was and is the industry on which human life,
and therefore all other industries and all progress, did and do rest.
Secondly, because its economic importance in the ancient world, so far
from declining, manifestly increased. The problem of food-supply was
always there. And it was never more pressing than in the later ages
of Rome, when imperial efforts to enforce production, if successful,
fed her barbarian armies, at the same time attracting the attention of
barbarian invaders to lands that promised the food-crops which they
themselves were too lazy to produce. Thirdly, because the importance
of agriculture was and is not merely economic. Its moral value, as a
nursery of steady citizens and, at need, of hardy soldiers, was and still
should be recognized by thoughtful men. Therefore its conditions and its
relative prosperity or decay deserve the attention of all historians
of all periods. Unluckily statistical record of a scientific character
is not available for the times that we call ancient, and numbers are
notoriously liable to corruption in manuscripts. Therefore I have only
ventured to give figures seldom and with reserve. For agriculture we
have nothing on the scale of the inscriptions that record wages, for
instance on public works at Athens. On the other hand we have for certain
periods the evidence of specialists such as Cato, Varro and Columella,
to whom we owe much information as to the actual or possible conditions
of rustic enterprise and labour. The relation of agriculture and
agricultural labour to the state as a whole is a subject illustrated by
great theorists such as Plato and Aristotle. The practical problems of
landowning and farming meet us now and then in the contemporary evidence
of such men as Xenophon and the younger Pliny. Even orators, though
necessarily partisan witnesses, at times give valuable help: they may
distort facts, but it is not their interest to lessen their own power
of persuasion by asserting what is manifestly incredible. The ancient
historians tell us very little, even of the past; contemporary evidence
from them is especially rare. They are preoccupied with public affairs,
and the conditions of rustic life and labour only concern them at
moments when serious distress or disorder compels attention. Rhetoricians
and poets are doubtful witnesses. Like the orators, they use their matter
freely and with much colouring for their immediate purposes. But they are
not, like forensic orators, in direct contact with practical emergencies.
The questions arising out of Vergil’s _Georgics_ are problems to be
discussed by themselves.

The contribution of encyclopaedic or occasional writers is in some
cases of value. I will here only name the elder Pliny and Apuleius.
Books of travel and geography, for instance Herodotus and Strabo, give
stray details, but generally in reference to distant countries, mostly
in the East and so hardly within my subject, save for purposes of
comparison. There are however two topics with which I am not directly
concerned, but which it is impossible wholly to ignore in speaking of
ancient agriculture. First, the relation of military duty to landholding
[the farmer as citizen soldier], and mercenary service [the rustic as
volunteer for pay]. This has been so fully treated in modern handbooks
that I need say little about it. Secondly, the various conditions of
tenure of land. That rustic life and therewith rustic labour were
directly and deeply affected by varieties of tenure, needs no proof. The
cited opinions of Roman lawyers in the Digest are the main authority on
points of this kind, and stray references elsewhere serve to illustrate
them. In conclusion I have only to insist again on the fact that we have
no direct witness of the labourer’s, or even the working farmer’s, point
of view. The evidence all comes from above; and therefore generally gives
us a picture of conditions as the law meant them to be and presumed them
normally to be. How far the practical working corresponded to the legal
position, is only to be guessed with caution from the admissions involved
in the elaboration of legal remedies; and, in the case of imperial
_coloni_, from the unique evidence of the notable African inscriptions.

It is I trust after the above considerations not unreasonable to devote
no special chapters to certain writers whom nevertheless it is often
necessary to cite in notes. Diodorus, Livy, Athenaeus, Macrobius,
Gellius, Palladius, are cases of the kind. Stray references in their
works are valuable, but there is nothing to require a treatment of
them as several wholes. Even Livy is chiefly useful as handing down
remains of past tradition: hence he (and Dionysius and Plutarch with
him) have a leading place in the introductory chapter on early Rome.
So too the writers of the so-called _historia Augusta_ and the laws of
the Theodosian and Justinian Codes find their place in the notes to
certain chapters. On the other hand (to omit obvious cases) Euripides,
Xenophon, the younger Seneca, Martial, the younger Pliny, Apuleius,
Ammianus, Symmachus, Apollinaris Sidonius, need careful treatment with
full regard to the periods and circumstances by which their evidential
values are severally qualified. And in order to place each witness in
his proper setting it is sometimes necessary to pause and group a number
of circumstances together in a special chapter. This arises from the
endeavour to preserve so far as possible the thread of continuity, which
is always really there, though at times very thin, owing to the loss of
many works in the course of ages. In such chapters one has to look both
backward and forward, and often to digress for a moment on topics only
connected indirectly with the main object.

I have tried to avoid needless repetitions, but some repetitions are
unavoidable, since the same point often serves to illustrate different
parts of the argument. To make a system of cross-references from chapter
to chapter quite complete is hardly possible, and would add immensely
to the bulk of footnotes. It has seemed better to attempt completeness
by elaboration of the Index. A few details from a period later than
that with which I am concerned are given in the Appendix, as being
of interest. Also the names of some books from which in a course of
miscellaneous reading I have derived more or less help, particularly in
noting modern survivals or analogies. For significant matter occurs in
quite unexpected quarters. And the observers who record facts of rustic
life and labour in Italy or France, in North or Central or South America,
without attempting to manipulate them in connexion with a theory, deserve
much gratitude.

It is evident that in the handling of evidence there is room for some
variety of method. And it seems reasonable to hold that the choice of
method should be mainly guided by two leading considerations, the nature
of the evidence available and the aim of the inquiry pursued. In the
present case the inquiry deals with a part, a somewhat neglected part,
of Greco-Roman history: and the subject is one that can by no means be
strictly confined to ascertaining the bare facts of farm life and labour.
That the conditions of agriculture were not only important in connexion
with food-supply, but had an extensive moral and political bearing, is
surely beyond dispute. And the nature of the surviving evidence favours,
or rather requires, the taking of a correspondingly wide view. Outside
the circle of technical writings, the literary evidence almost always
has an eye to the position of agriculture as related to the common
weal; nor is this point of view ignored even by the technical writers.
Therefore, in treating the subject as I have tried to treat it, it is
very necessary to take each witness separately so far as possible, and
not to appraise the value of his testimony without a fair consideration
of his condition and environment. This necessity is peculiarly obvious in
the case of the theorists, whose witness is instructive in a very high
degree, but only when we bear in mind the existing state of things from
observation of which their conclusions were derived. And the changes of
attitude in philosophic thought are sometimes highly instructive. Take
farm life and labour as it appears to Plato and Aristotle and later to
Musonius: a whole volume of history, economic moral and political, lies
in the interval of some 400 years. Inscriptions furnish little to the
student of this subject, but that little is worth having. To conclude
this paragraph, I do not apologize for putting my authorities in the
witness-box and questioning them one by one. For only thus do I see a
possibility of giving a true picture of the conditions with which I am
concerned. It is a long method, but perhaps not uninteresting, and I see
no other.

It may seem necessary to explain why I have not devoted special chapters
to rustic life and labour in Oriental countries, some of which eventually
became parts of the Roman empire. Such countries are for instance Egypt,
Palestine and Syria. One reason is that I could do nothing more than
compile conclusions of the inquirers who have lately rescued a vast mass
of detail, chiefly from the Egyptian papyri. Age forbade me to undertake
this task unless it seemed clear that my inquiry really depended on it.
But, inasmuch as I have not been trying to produce a technical treatise
upon ancient agriculture, I do not think it necessary. That there is
room for such a treatise, I have no doubt: nor that its writer will
need to have many years at his disposal and a good knowledge of several
sciences at his back. With regard to eastern countries other than Egypt,
practically the Seleucid empire, knowledge is at present very scanty,
as Rostowzew has to confess. Ancient India lies quite beyond my range,
as having never been a part of the Roman empire: but there is evidently
much of interest to be gathered in this field. From these extensive and
promising researches my limited effort is divided by a clearly marked
line. I am concerned with agriculture and agricultural labour not as the
occupation of passive populations merely producing so much food year by
year, peoples over whom centuries might pass without ascertainable change
of a moral social or political character. Such peoples, in short, as do
not get beyond the conception of ruler and ruled to that of state and
citizen, or at least have not yet done so. For of all conclusions to be
drawn from the history of the Greco-Roman world none seems to me more
certain than the fact that, while political social and moral movements
affected the conditions of agriculture, agricultural changes reacted
upon political social and moral conditions. Thus the general history of
the peoples, comprising the rise and fall of ancient efforts towards
self-government, must always be kept in view: the fluctuations of what
I may call civic values, and the position of farmers as labourers or
employers of labour cannot be treated in separate compartments and
their reciprocal effect ignored. That in the later stages of my inquiry
Oriental influences begin to dominate Roman imperial policy, is evident,
and I have not left this factor out of account. But this phenomenon
announces the end of the old world. The long struggle of the Empire in
the East and its final overthrow by the forces of Islam, its break-up in
the West and the foundation of new nation-states, are beyond my range. In
the Appendix I have put some remarks on two documents of the Byzantine
period, from which we get glimpses of changes that were proceeding in the
eastern empire while it still held its ground and was indeed the most
highly organized of existing powers. To these I have subjoined a list of
some of the books I have consulted and found helpful in various degrees,
particularly such as have furnished modern illustrations in the way of
analogy or survival. A few special quotations from some of these may
serve to shew how very striking such illustrations can be.


II. LAND AND LABOUR.

Of the many difficult questions connected with the past history of the
human race few have evoked such a difference of opinion as the practical
importance of slavery. By some inquirers it has been held that the
so-called ‘classical’ civilization of the Greco-Roman world rested upon
a slavery basis, in short that slavery alone enabled that civilization
to follow the lines of its actual development. In reply to this doctrine
it is urged[4] that its holders have been led astray by an unhistorical
method. They have been deeply impressed by the all-pervading evils of
the economic and domestic slave-system during the period (say 200 BC-200
AD roughly) when it was in full extension and vigour. The prepossession
thus created has led them to misinterpret the phenomena of earlier ages,
and to ignore the significance of the later period of decline. Prejudiced
eyes have detected slavery where it was not, and have seen in it where
existent an importance greater than impartial inquiry will justify.
Moreover the discussion of slavery-questions in modern times, conducted
with the intemperate warmth of partisan controversy, have had an
influence unfavourable to the statement of facts in their true relations,
and therefore to the exercise of cool judgment. According to this view
the facts of our record shew that, while slave-labour had its four
centuries or so of predominance, free-labour never ceased, and on it,
and not on slavery, the civilization of the ‘classical’ world was built
up. It is argued that in primitive conditions there was little slavery,
that growth of trade and exchange (and therewith of civilization) led
to division of labour and the growth of larger enterprises. On this
follows a time in which the employment of slave-labour becomes more and
more common, and ends by being for some centuries the basis of economic
and domestic life. In due course comes the period of decline, when for
various reasons slaves became less numerous, and the highly-organized
civilization of antiquity relapses into the primitive conditions of
the early Middle Age. Slavery is not extinct, but reverts generally to
various degrees of serfdom, resembling that which meets us in the early
traditions of Greek slavery. Things have gone round the full circle, and
the world takes a fresh start.

This version of the process is attractive. It presents to us a spectacle
of cyclic movement, pleasing from its simplicity and dignity. But it
seems to imply that the old civilization reached its height more or
less concurrently with the growth of slavery. One is driven to ask[5]
whether the concurrence was purely accidental or not. So far as concerns
the manufacture of articles for export by slave-industry, it can hardly
have been a mere chance: nor is it denied that in this department it
was the demand created by the needs of growing civilization that called
forth the supply. Luxury too is merely a name for such needs when they
clearly exceed strict necessaries of life: and here too the monstrous
extravagancies of domestic slavery were a characteristic feature of the
civilization of the Greco-Roman world. That neither of these forms of
servile employment could outlive the civilization that had produced them,
is surely no wonder. The case of slavery in agriculture is less simple,
and several questions may suggest themselves to anyone who considers this
subject with an open mind.

Agriculture was long regarded, from a social point of view, as superior
to other occupations dependent on bodily labour. This opinion dated
from very early times when, as traditions agree, the land was owned by
privileged nobles who as members of powerful clans formed aristocracies
of a more or less military character. War was waged by men fighting hand
to hand, and it was natural that handwork of a kind likely to promote
health and strength should be honoured above manual trades of a less
invigorating and even sedentary character. The development of cities and
urban life, which in many states led to the overthrow of the old clan
aristocracies, did not make handicraftsmen the equals of agriculturists
in popular esteem. Pressure to win a firm footing on the land was as
marked a feature in Athenian Attica as in Roman Latium. Agriculture was
a profession worthy of the free citizen, and the ownership of a plot of
land stamped the citizen as a loyal and responsible member of a free and
self-conscious community. The ruin of Attic farmers in the Peloponnesian
war, the disastrous changes in Italian agriculture after Rome became
imperial, still left the old prepossession. The charm of country life
and pursuits remained as an ineffective ideal. Greek philosophers were
impressed with the virtues of farmer-folk, virtues social moral and
ultimately political. From them Cicero and others learnt to praise
rustic life: the Gracchi made vain efforts to revive it: the poets, led
by Vergil, pictured the glories of old Italian agriculture: but the
aspirations were vain. The ‘classical’ civilization was urban in its
growth, and urban it remained. Writers on agriculture might lament that
free men, capable of tilling the land, loitered idly in the city. In
practice they had to take facts as they found them, and give elaborate
precepts for a farm-system in which slavery was the essential factor.

It was and is possible to regard agriculture from various points of
view. Three of these at least deserve a preliminary consideration. The
nakedly economic view, that the production of food is necessary for any
life above that of mere savages, and therefore is worthy of respect,
can never have been wholly absent from men’s minds in any age. It was
common property, and found frequent expression. Even when various causes
led to much dependence on imported corn, the sentiment still survived,
and its soundness was recognized by philosophers. The military view,
that the hardy peasant makes the best soldier, was generally accepted in
principle, but its relation to agriculture in the strict sense of tillage
was not always a direct one. The technical training of skilled combatants
began early in Greece. It was not only in the Spartan or Cretan systems
that such training was normal: the citizen armies of Athens consisted
of men who had passed through a long course of gymnastic exercises and
drill. During their training these young men can hardly have devoted
much labour to the tillage of farms, even those of them who were of
country birth. What percentage of them settled down in their later years
to farm-life, is just what one vainly wishes to know. The helot-system
supplied the tillage that fed the warrior-caste of Sparta. It would seem
that the toils of hunting played a great part in producing the military
fitness required of the young Spartiate. We may be pretty sure that
the Thessalian cavalry—wealthy lords ruling dependent cultivators—were
not tillers of the soil. Boeotia and Arcadia were both lands in which
there was a large farmer class. Boeotian infantry were notable for their
steadiness in the shock of battle. But they were not untrained, far from
it. United action was ever difficult in Arcadia, where small cities
lay scattered in the folds of mountains. Hence no Arcadian League ever
played a leading part in Greece. But the rustics of these country towns
and villages were man for man as good material for war-work as Greece
could produce. In the later age of professional soldering they, with the
Aetolians and others in the less civilized parts, furnished numbers of
recruits to the Greek mercenary armies. But the regular mercenary who had
the luck to retire in comfortable circumstances, on savings of pay and
loot, is portrayed to us as more inclined to luxury and wantonness in
some great city than to the simple monotony of rustic life. Nor must we
forget that slaves were often an important part[6] of war-booty, and that
the professional warrior was used to the attendance of slaves (male and
female) even on campaigns. So far the connexion of peasant and soldier
does not amount to much more than the admission that the former was a
type of man able to endure the hardships of a military career.

The national regular army formed by Philip son of Amyntas in Macedonia,
afterwards the backbone of Alexander’s mixed host, is in itself a
phenomenon of great interest: for in making it Philip made a nation.
That the ranks were mainly filled with country folk is certain. But,
what with wastage in wars and the settlement of many old soldiers in the
East, there is little evidence to shew whether any considerable number
of veterans returned to Macedon and settled on the land. I believe that
such cases were few. The endless wars waged by Alexander’s successors
with mixed and mongrel armies were hardly favourable to rustic pursuits:
foundation of great new cities was the characteristic of the times. When
we turn to Rome we find a very different story. Tradition represents
landowners settled on the land and tilling it as the persons responsible
for the defence of the state. Cincinnatus called from the plough to
be dictator is the typical figure of early patriotic legend. When the
Roman Plebeians dislodged the Patrician clans from their monopoly of
political power, the burden of military service still rested on the
_adsidui_, the men with a footing on the land. Tradition still shews us
the farmer-soldier taking the risk of disaster to his homestead during
his absence on campaigns. In the historical twilight of fragmentary
details, coloured by later imagination, thus much is clear and credible.
The connexion between landholding and soldiering was not openly
disregarded until the reforms of Marius. The age of revolution was then
already begun, and one of its most striking features was the creation
of a professional soldiery, a force which, as experience proved, was
more easy to raise than to disband. The method of pensioning veterans
by assigning to them parcels of land for settlement was in general a
failure, for the men were unused to thrift and indisposed to a life of
patient and uneventful labour. The problem of the Republic was inherited
by the Empire, and attempts at solution were only partially successful:
but the system of standing armies, posted on the frontiers, made the
settlement of veterans in border-provinces a matter of less difficulty.
From the third century AD onwards we find a new plan coming into use. Men
were settled with their families on lands near the frontiers, holding
them by a military tenure which imposed hereditary liability to service
in the armies. Thus the difficulty was for a time met by approaching it
from the other end. The superiority of the rustic recruit was as fully
recognized as ever: at the end of the fourth century it was reaffirmed[7]
by Vegetius.

I pass on to the third point of view, which I may perhaps call
philosophic. It appears in practice as the view of the statesman, in
theory as that of the speculative philosopher. Men whose life and
interests are bound up with agriculture are in general a steady class,
little inclined to wild agitations and rash ventures. On a farm there
is always something not to be left undone without risk of loss. The
operations of nature go on unceasingly, uncontrolled by man. Man must
adapt himself to the conditions of soil and weather: hence he must be
ever on the watch to take advantage of his opportunities, and this leaves
him scant leisure for politics. We may add that the habit of conforming
to nature’s laws, and of profiting by not resisting what cannot be
successfully resisted, is a perpetual education in patience. Working
farmers as a class were not men lightly to embark in revolutionary
schemes, so long as their condition was at all tolerable. It must be
borne in mind that before the invention of representative systems a
citizen could only vote by appearing in person at the city, where all the
Assemblies were held. Assemblies might be adjourned, and two journeys,
to the city and back, were not only time-wasting and tiresome, but
might have to be repeated. Accordingly we hear of the encouragement of
Attic farmers by Peisistratus[8] as being a policy designed to promote
the stability of his government. At Rome we find reformers alarmed at
the decay of the farmer-class in a great part of Italy, and straining
to revive it as the sound basis of a national life, the only practical
means of purifying the corrupted institutions of the state. Selfish
opposition on the part of those interested in corruption was too strong
for reformers, and the chance of building up a true Italian nation passed
away. The working farmer had disappeared from Roman politics. The swords
and the venal city mob remained, and the later literature was left to
deplore the consequences.

The course of agricultural decline in Greece was different in detail from
that in Italy, but its evil effects on political life were early noted,
at least in Attica. The rationalist Euripides saw the danger clearly,
during the Peloponnesian war; and the sympathy of the conservative
Aristophanes with the suffering farmers was plainly marked. The merits
of the farmer-class as ‘safe’ citizens, the backbone of a wise and
durable state-life, became almost a commonplace of Greek political
theory. Plato and Aristotle might dream of ideal states, governed by
skilled specialists professionally trained for their career from boyhood.
In their more practical moments, turning from aspirations to facts
of the world around them, they confessed the political value of the
farmer-class. To Aristotle the best hope of making democracy a wholesome
and tolerable form of government lay in the strengthening of this
element: the best Demos is the γεωργικὸς δῆμος, and it is a pity that it
so often becomes superseded by the growing population devoted to trades
and commerce. I need not carry further these brief and imperfect outlines
of the honourable opinion held of agriculture in the Greco-Roman world.
As producing necessary food, as rearing hardy soldiers, as favouring the
growth and maintenance of civic virtues, it was the subject of general
praise. Some might confess that they shrank from personal labour on the
land. Yet even in Caesarian Rome it is somewhat startling when Sallust[9]
dismisses farming in a few words of cynical contempt.

It is clear that the respect felt for agriculture was largely due to
the opinion that valuable qualities of body and mind were closely
connected with its practice and strengthened thereby. So long as it
was on the primitive footing, each household finding labour for its
own maintenance, the separation of handwork and direction could hardly
arise. This primitive state of things, assumed by theorists ancient and
modern, and depicted in tradition, had ceased to be normal in the time
of our earliest records. And the employment of persons, not members of
the household, as hired labourers, or of bondmen only connected with the
house as dependents, at once differentiated these ‘hands’ from the master
and his family. The master could not habitually hire day-labourers or
keep a slave unless he found it paid him to do so. For a man to work for
his own profit or for that of another were very different things. This
simple truism, however, does not end the matter from my present point of
view. It is necessary to ask whether the respect felt for agriculture
was so extended as to include the hired labourer and the slave as well
as the working master. We shall see that it was not. The house-master,
holding and cultivating a plot of land on a secure tenure, is the figure
glorified in traditions and legendary scenes. The Greek term αὐτουργός,
the man who does his own work, is specially applied to him as a man that
works with his own hands. It crops up in literature often, from Euripides
to Polybius and Dion Chrysostom; and sometimes, when the word is not
used, it is represented by equivalents. But both the hired labourer and
the slave were employed for the express purpose of working with their
own hands. And yet, so far as agriculture is concerned, I cannot find
that they were credited with αὐτουργία, the connotation[10] of which
is generally favourable, seldom neutral, never (I think) unfavourable.
It seems then that the figure present to the mind was one who not only
worked with his own hands, but worked for his own profit—that is, on his
own farm. And with this interpretation the traditions of early Rome fully
agree.

To admit this does not however imply that the working house-master
employed neither hired labourer nor slave. So long as he took a hand
in the farm-work, he was a working cultivator for his own profit. The
larger the scale of his holding, the more he would need extra labour.
If prosperous, he would be able to increase his holding or supplement
his farming[11] by other enterprises. More and more he would be tempted
to drop handwork and devote himself to direction. If still successful,
he might move on a stage further, living in the city and carrying on
his farms by deputy, employing stewards, hired freemen or slaves, or
freedmen, his former slaves. If he found in the city more remunerative
pursuits than agriculture, he might sell his land and the live and dead
stock thereon, and become simply an urban capitalist. So far as I know,
this last step was very seldom taken; and I believe the restraining
influence to have been the prestige attached to the ownership of land,
even when civic franchises had ceased to depend on the possession of that
form of property alone. If this view be correct, the fact is notable: for
the system of great landed estates, managed by stewards[12] on behalf of
wealthy owners who lived in the city, was the ruin of the peasant farmer
class, in whose qualities statesmen and philosophers saw the guarantee
for the state’s lasting vigour. No longer were αὐτουργοὶ a force in
politics: in military service the professional soldier, idling in the
intervals of wars, superseded the rustic, levied for a campaign and
looking forward to the hour of returning to his plough. It was in Italy
that the consummation of this change was most marked, for Rome alone
provided a centre in which the great landlord could reside and influence
political action in his own interest. To Rome the wealth extorted from
tributary subjects flowed in an ever-swelling stream. No small part of
the spoils served to enrich the noble landlords, directly or indirectly,
and to supply them with the funds needed for corrupting the city mob
and so controlling politics. Many could afford to hold their lands even
when it was doubtful whether estates managed by slaves or hirelings
were in fact a remunerative investment. If we may believe Cicero, it
was financial inability[13] to continue this extravagant policy that
drove some men of apparent wealth to favour revolutionary schemes. The
old-fashioned farmstead, the _villa_, was modernized into a luxurious
country seat, in which the owner might now and then pass a brief recess,
attended by his domestic slaves from Town, and perhaps ostentatiously
entertaining a party of fashionable friends.

We have followed the sinister progress of what I will call the
Agricultural Interest, from the ‘horny-handed’ peasant[14] farmer to
the land-proud capitalist. No doubt the picture is a highly coloured
one, but in its general outlines we are not entitled to question its
truth. Exceptions there certainly were. In hilly parts of Italy a rustic
population[15] of freemen survived, and it was from them that the jobbing
gangs of wage-earners of whom we read were drawn. And in the great plain
of the Po agricultural conditions remained far more satisfactory than in
such districts as Etruria or Lucania, where great estates were common.
A genuine farming population seems there to have held most of the land,
and rustic slavery appeared in less revolting form. But these exceptions
did not avail to stay the decline of rural Italy. True, as the supply
of slave-labour gradually shrank in the empire, the working farmer
reappeared on the land. But he reappeared as a tenant gradually becoming
bound[16] to the soil, worried by the exactions of officials, or liable
to a blood-tax in the shape of military service. He was becoming not a
free citizen of a free state, but a half-free serf helplessly involved in
a great mechanical system. Such a person bore little resemblance to the
free farmer working with his own hands for himself on his own land, the
rustic figure from whom we started. On the military side, he was, if a
soldier, now soldier first and farmer afterwards: on the civic side, he
was a mere subject-unit, whose virtues were of no political importance
and commanded no respect. In the final stage we find the government
recruiting its armies from barbarians and concerned to keep the farmer on
the land. So cogent then was the necessity of insuring the supply of food
for the empire and its armies.

At this point we must return to our first question, how far the
agriculture of the Greco-Roman world depended on free or slave labour.
It is clear that, while the presence of the slave presupposes the
freeman to control him, the presence of the freeman does not necessarily
imply that of the slave. Dion Chrysostom[17] was logically justified in
saying that freedom comes before slavery in order of time. And no doubt
this is true so long as we only contemplate the primitive condition of
households each providing for its own vital needs by the labour of its
members. But the growth of what we call civilization springs from the
extension of needs beyond the limits of what is absolutely necessary for
human existence. By what steps the advantages of division of labour were
actually discovered is a subject for the reconstructive theorist. But it
must have been observed at a very early stage that one man’s labour might
be to another man’s profit. Those who tamed and employed other animals
were not likely to ignore the possibilities offered by the extension of
the system to their brother men. It would seem the most natural thing
in the world. It might be on a very small scale, and any reluctance on
the bondsman’s part might be lessened by the compensations of food and
protection. A powerful master might gather round him a number of such
dependent beings, and he had nothing to gain by treating them cruelly.
On them he could devolve the labour of producing food, and so set free
his own kinsmen to assert the power of their house. In an age of conflict
stronger units tended to absorb weaker, and the formation of larger
societies would tend to create fresh needs, to encourage the division of
labour, and to promote civilization by the process of exchange. Labour
under assured control was likely to prove an economic asset of increasing
value. In agriculture it would be of special importance as providing food
for warriors busied with serving the community in war.

This imaginative sketch may serve to remind us that there are two
questions open to discussion in relation to the subject. First, the
purely speculative one, whether the early stages of progress in
civilization could have been passed without the help of slavery. Second,
the question of fact, whether they were so passed or not. It is the
latter with which I am concerned. The defects of the evidence on which
we have to form an opinion are manifest. Much of it is not at first
hand, and it will often be necessary to comment on its unsatisfactory
character. In proceeding to set it out in detail, I must again repeat
that two classes of free handworkers must be clearly kept distinct—those
who work for themselves, and those who work for others. It is the
latter class only that properly come into comparison with slaves. A man
habitually working for himself may of course work occasionally for others
as a wage-earner. But here, as in the case of the farmer-soldier, we have
one person in two capacities.




AUTHORITIES IN DETAIL—GREEK


III. THE HOMERIC POEMS.

=The Iliad.= In a great war-poem we can hardly expect to find many
references to the economic labours of peace. And an army fighting far
from home in a foreign land would naturally be out of touch with the
rustic life of Greece. Nor was the poet concerned to offer us the details
of supply-service, though he represents the commissariat as efficient.
Free labour appears[18] in various forms of handicraft, and the mention
of pay (μισθός)[19] shews wage-earning as a recognized fact. We hear of
serving for hire (θητεύειν)[20], and the ἔριθοι or farm-labourers[21]
seem to be θῆτες under a special name. That labour is not viewed as a
great degradation may fairly be inferred from the case of Hephaestus the
smith-god, from the wage-service of Poseidon and Apollo under Laomedon,
and from the herdsman-service of Apollo under Admetus. Agriculture is
assumed, and in the Catalogue ‘works’ (ἔργα)[22] occurs in the sense of
‘tilled lands.’ But it is chiefly in similes or idyllic scenes that we
get glimpses of farming[23] operations. Thus we have ploughing, reaping,
binding, threshing, winnowing. Most striking of all is the passage in
which the work of irrigation[24] is graphically described. There is no
reason to suppose that any of the workers in these scenes are slaves:
they would seem to be wage-earners. But I must admit that, if slaves were
employed under the free workers, the poet would very likely not mention
such a detail: that is, if slavery were a normal institution taken for
granted. For the present I assume only free labour in these cases. We are
made aware of a clear social difference between the rich and powerful
employer and the employed labourer. The mowers are at work in the field
of some rich man[25] (ἀνδρὸς μάκαρος κατ’ ἄρουραν), who does not appear
to lend a hand himself. Or again in the close of a ruler (τέμενος
βασιλήιον)[26], with binders following them, a busy scene. The βασιλεὺς
himself stands watching them in dignified silence, staff in hand. There
is nothing here to suggest that the small working farmer was a typical
figure in the portraiture of rural life. Flocks and herds are of great
importance, indeed the ox is a normal standard of value. But the herdsmen
are mean freemen. Achilles is disgusted[27] at the prospect of being
drowned by Scamander ‘like a young swineherd swept away by a stream in
flood.’ For the heroes of the poem are warrior-lords: the humble toilers
of daily life are of no account beside them.

And yet the fact of slavery stands out clearly, and also its connexion
with the fact of capture in war. The normal way of dealing with enemies
is to slay the men and enslave the women. The wife of a great warrior has
many handmaidens, captives of her lord’s prowess. A slave-trade exists,
and we hear of males being spared[28] and ‘sold abroad’: for they are
sent ‘to islands far away’ or ‘beyond the salt sea.’ We do not find male
slaves with the army: perhaps we may guess that they were not wanted.
A single reference to δμῶες (properly slave-captives) appears in XIX
333, where Achilles, speaking of his property at home in Phthia, says
κτῆσιν ἐμὴν δμῶάς τε. But we cannot be certain that these slaves are
farm-hands. We can only reflect that a slave bought and paid for was not
likely to be fed in idleness or put to the lightest work. In general it
seems that what weighed upon the slave, male or female, was the pressure
of constraint, the loss of freedom, not the fear of cruel treatment.
What Hector keeps from the Trojans[29] is the ‘day of constraint,’ ἦμαρ
ἀναγκαῖον, also expressed by δούλιον ἦμαρ. Viewed from the other side we
find enslavement consisting in a taking away[30] the ‘day of freedom,’
ἐλεύθερον ἦμαρ. The words δούλην III 409 and ἀνδραπόδεσσι VII 475 are
isolated cases of substantives in passages the genuineness of which has
been questioned. On the whole it is I think not an unfair guess that, if
the poet had been depicting the life of this same Greek society in their
homeland, and not under conditions of present war, we should have found
more references to slavery as a working institution. As it is, we get
a momentary glimpse[31] of neighbour landowners, evidently on a small
scale, engaged in a dispute concerning their boundaries, measuring-rod
in hand; and nothing to shew whether such persons supplied the whole of
their own labour in tillage or supplemented it by employing hired men or
slaves.

=The Odyssey= is generally held to be of later date than the Iliad. A far
more important distinction is that its scenes are not episodes of war. A
curious difference of terms[32] is seen in the case of the word οἰκῆες,
which in the Iliad seems to mean ‘house-folk’ including both free and
slave, in the Odyssey to mean slaves only. But as to the condition of
slaves there is practically no difference. A conquered foe was spared on
the battlefield by grace of the conqueror, whose ownership of his slave
was unlimited: and this unlimited right could be conveyed by sale[33]
to a third party. We find Odysseus ready to consign offending slaves[34]
to torture mutilation or death. In the story of his visit to Troy[35] as
a spy we hear that he passed for a slave, and that part of his disguise
consisted in the marks of flogging. Yet the relations of master and
mistress to their slaves are most kindly in ordinary circumstances. The
faithful slave is a type glorified in the Odyssey: loyalty is the first
virtue of a slave, and it is disloyalty, however shewn, that justifies
the master’s vengeance. For they live on intimate terms[36] with their
master and mistress and are trusted to a wonderful degree. In short
we may say that the social atmosphere of the Odyssey is full of mild
slavery, but that in the background there is always the grim possibility
of atrocities committed by absolute power. And we have a trace even
of secondary[37] slavery: for the swineherd, himself a slave, has an
under-slave of his own, bought with his own goods from slave-dealers
while his own master was abroad. Naturally enough we find slaves classed
as a part of the lord’s estate. Odysseus hopes[38] that before he dies
he may set eyes on his property, his slaves and his lofty mansion. But
another and perhaps socially more marked distinction seems implied in
the suitors’ question[39] about Telemachus—‘who were the lads that went
with him on his journey? were they young nobles of Ithaca, or his own
hired men and slaves (θῆτές τε δμῶές τε)?’ The answer is that they were
‘the pick of the community, present company excepted.’ The wage-earner
and the slave do not seem to be parted by any broad social line. Indeed
civilization had a long road yet to travel before levelling movement
among the free classes drew a vital distinction between them on the one
side and slaves on the other.

Free workers of various kinds are often referred to, and we are, owing
to the circumstances of the story, brought more into touch with them
than in the Iliad. Handicraftsmen[40] are a part of the life of the
time, and we must assume the smith the carpenter and the rest of the
males to be free: female slaves skilled in working wool do not justify
us in supposing that the corresponding men are slaves. Beside these are
other men who practise a trade useful to the community, ‘public-workers’
(δημιοεργοί)[41], but not necessarily handworkers. Thus we find the
seer, the leech, the bard, classed with the carpenter as persons whom
all men would readily entertain as guests; the wandering beggar none
would invite. The last is a type of ‘mean freeman,’ evidently common in
that society. He is too much akin to the suppliant, whom religion[42]
protects, to be roughly shewn the door: he is αἰδοῖος ἀλήτης[43],
and trades on the reverence felt for one who appeals as stranger to
hospitable custom. Thus he picks up a living[44] from the scraps and
offals of great houses. But he is despised, and, what concerns us here,
despised[45] not only for his abject poverty but for his aversion to
honest work. That the poet admires industry is clear, and is curiously
illustrated by his contrasted pictures of civilization and barbarism.
In Phaeacia are the fenced-in gardens[46] that supply Alcinous and his
people with never-failing fruits: the excellence of their naval craftsmen
is expressed in the ‘yarn’ of ships that navigate themselves. In the land
of the Cyclopes, nature provides[47] them with corn and wine, but they
neither sow nor plough. They have flocks of sheep and goats. They have
no ships or men to build them. They live in caves, isolated savages with
no rudiments of civil life. It is not too much to say that the poet is
a believer in work and a contemner of idleness: the presence of slaves
does not suggest that the free man is to be lazy. Odysseus boasts of his
activities (δρηστοσύνη)[48]. He is ready to split wood and lay a fire, to
prepare and serve a meal, and in short to wait on the insolent suitors as
inferiors do on nobles. Of course he is still the unknown wanderer: but
the contrast[49] between him and the genuine beggar Irus is an effective
piece of by-play in the poem.

Turning to agriculture, we may note that it fills no small place. Wheat
and barley, pounded or ground to meal, seem to furnish the basis of
civilized diet. The Cyclops[50] does not look like a ‘bread-eating man,’
and wine completely upsets him to his ruin. Evidently the bounty of
nature has been wasted on such a savage. But the cultivation of cereal
crops is rather assumed than emphasized in the pictures of Greek life. We
hear of tilled lands (ἔργα)[51], and farm-labour (ἔργον)[52] is mentioned
as too wearisome for a high-spirited warrior noble. The tired and hungry
plowman[53] appears in a simile. But the favourite culture is that of the
vine and olive and other fruits in orchards carefully fenced and tended.
One of the suitors makes a jesting offer[54] to the unknown Odysseus
‘Stranger, would you be willing to serve for hire (θητευέμεν), if I took
you on, in an outlying field—you shall have a sufficient wage—gathering
stuff for fences and planting tall trees? I would see that you were
regularly fed clothed and shod. No, you are a ne’er-do-weel (ἔργα κάκ’
ἔμμαθες) and will not do farm-work (ἔργον): you prefer to go round
cringing for food to fill your insatiate belly.’ This scornful proposal
sets the noble’s contempt for wage-earning labour in a clear light. And
the shade of Achilles, repudiating[55] the suggestion that it is a great
thing to be a ruler among the dead in the ghostly world, says ‘I had
rather be one bound to the soil, serving another for hire, employed by
some landless man of little property, than be king of all the dead.’ He
is speaking strongly: to work for hire, a mean destiny at best, is at its
meanest when the employer is a man with no land-lot of his own (ἄκληρος),
presumably occupying on precarious tenure a bit of some lord’s estate.
After such utterances we cannot wonder that as we saw above, θῆτες and
δμῶες are mentioned[56] in the same breath.

That slaves are employed on the farm is clear enough. When Penelope
sends for old Dolius[57], a _servus dotalis_ of hers (to use the Roman
expression) she adds ‘who is in charge of my fruit-garden,’ So too the
aged Laertes, living a hard life on his farm, has a staff of slaves[58]
to do his will, and their quarters and farm duties are a marked detail of
the picture. The old man, in dirty rags like a slave, is a contrast[59]
to the garden, in which every plant and tree attests the devoted toil
of his gardeners under his own skilled direction. Odysseus, as yet
unrecognized by his father, asks him how he comes to be in such a mean
attire, though under it he has the look of a king. Then he drops this
tone and says ‘but tell me, whose slave[60] are you, and who owns the
orchard you are tending?’ The hero knows his father, but to preserve
for the present his own incognito he addresses him as the slave that
he appears to be. Now if garden work was done by slaves, surely the
rougher operations of corn-growing were not confined to free labour, and
slaves pass unmentioned as a matter of course. Or are we to suppose that
free labour had been found more economical in the long run, and so was
employed for the production of a staple food? I can hardly venture to
attribute so mature a view to the society of the Odyssey. We must not
forget that animal food, flesh and milk, was an important element of
diet, and that the management of flocks and herds was therefore a great
part of rustic economy. But the herdsmen in charge are slaves, such as
Eumaeus, bought in his youth by Laertes[61] of Phoenician kidnappers.
In romancing about his own past experiences Odysseus describes a raid
in Egypt, and how the natives rallied[62] and took their revenge. ‘Many
of our company they slew: others they took alive into the country, to
serve them in forced labour.’ As the ravaging of their ‘beautiful farms’
was a chief part of the raiders’ offence, the labour exacted from these
captives seems most probably agricultural.

An interesting question arises in reference to the faithful slaves, the
swineherd and the goatherd. When Odysseus promises them rewards in the
event of his destroying the suitors with their help, does this include
an offer of freedom? Have we here, as some have thought, a case of
manumission—of course in primitive form, without the legal refinements
of later times? The promise is made[63] so to speak in the character
of a father-in-law: ‘I will provide you both with wives and give you
possessions and well-built houses near to me, and you shall in future be
to me comrades and brothers of Telemachus.’ The ‘brotherhood’ suggested
sounds as if it must imply freedom. But does it? Eumaeus had been
brought up[64] by Laertes as the playmate of his daughter Ctimene; yet
he remained nevertheless a slave. Earlier in the poem Eumaeus, excusing
the poor entertainment that he can offer the stranger (Odysseus), laments
the absence[65] of his lord, ‘who’ he says ‘would have shewn me hearty
affection and given me possessions such as a kindly lord gives his slave
(οἰκῆι), a house and a land-lot (κλῆρον) and a wife of recognized worth
(πολυμνήστην), as a reward for laborious and profitable service.’ Here
also there is no direct reference to an expected grant of freedom: nor
do I think that it is indirectly implied. It is no doubt tempting to
detect in these passages the germ of the later manumission. But it is not
easy to say why, in a world of little groups ruled by noble chiefs, the
gift of freedom should have been a longed-for boon. However high-born
the slave might have been in his native land, in Ithaca he was simply a
slave. If by belonging to a lord he got material comfort and protection,
what had he to gain by becoming a mere wage-earner? surely nothing. I can
see no ground for believing that in the society of the ‘heroic’ age the
bare name of freedom was greatly coveted. It was high birth that really
mattered, but the effect of this would be local: nothing would make
Eumaeus, though son of a king, noble in Ithaca. No doubt the slave might
be at the mercy of a cruel lord. Such a slave would long for freedom, but
such a lord was not likely to grant it. On the whole, it is rash to read
manumission into the poet’s words.

Reviewing the evidence presented by these ‘Homeric’ poems, it may be
well to insist on the obvious truism that we are not dealing with formal
treatises, charged with precise definitions and accurate statistics. The
information given by the poet drops out incidentally while he is telling
his tale and making his characters live. It is all the more genuine
because it is not furnished in support of a particular argument: but it
is at the same time all the less complete. And it is not possible to say
how far this or that detail may have been coloured by imagination. Still,
allowing freely for the difficulty suggested by these considerations, I
think we are justified in drawing a general inference as to the position
of handworkers, particularly on the land, in Greek ‘heroic’ society as
conceived by the poet. If the men who practise handicrafts are freemen,
and their presence welcome, this does not exalt them to anything like
equality with the warrior nobles and chiefs. And in agriculture the
labourer is either a slave or a wage-earner of a very dependent kind. The
lord shews no inclination to set his own hand to the plough. When one of
the suitors derisively invites the supposed beggar to abandon his idle
vagrancy for a wage-earning ‘job on the land,’ the disguised Odysseus
retorts[66] ‘Ah, if only you and I could compete in a match as reapers
hard at work fasting from dawn to dark, or at ploughing a big field with
a pair of full-fed spirited oxen,—you would soon see what I could do.’ He
adds that, if it came to war, his prowess would soon silence the sneer
at his begging for food instead of working. Now, does the hero imply
that he would really be willing to reap or plough? I do not think so:
what he means is that he is conscious of that reserve of bodily strength
which appears later in the poem, dramatically shewn in the bending of the
famous bow.


IV. HESIOD.

=Hesiod, Works and Days.= Whether this curious poem belongs in its
present shape to the seventh century BC, or not, I need not attempt to
decide. It seems certain that it is later than the great Homeric poems,
but is an early work, perhaps somewhat recast and interpolated, yet in
its main features representing conditions and views of a society rural,
half-primitive, aristocratic. I see no reason to doubt that it may fairly
be cited in evidence for my present purpose. The scene of the ‘Works’ is
in Boeotia: the works (ἔργα) are operations of farming, and the precepts
chiefly saws of rustic wisdom. Poverty[67] is the grim spectre that
haunts the writer, conscious of the oppressions of the proud and the
hardness of a greedy world. Debt, want, beggary, must be avoided at all
costs. They can only be avoided[68] by thrift, forethought, watchfulness,
promptitude that never procrastinates, and toil that never ceases.
And the mere appeal to self-interest is reinforced by recognizing the
stimulus of competition (ἔρις)[69] which in the form of honest rivalry
is a good influence. The poet represents himself as owner of a land-lot
(κλῆρος)[70], part of a larger estate, the joint patrimony of his brother
Perses and himself: this estate has already been divided, but points
of dispute still remain. Hesiod suggests that Perses has been wronging
him with the help of bribed ‘kings.’ But wrongdoing is not the true
road to wellbeing. A dinner of herbs and a clear conscience are the
better way. As the proverb says ‘half is more than the whole.’ Perses is
treated to much good advice, the gist of which is first and foremost an
exhortation[71] to work (ἐργάζευ), that is, work on the land, in which
is the source of honourable wealth. Personal labour is clearly meant: it
is in the sweat[72] of his brow that the farmer is to thrive. Such is
the ordinance of the gods. Man is meant to resemble[73] the worker bee,
not the worthless drone. It is not ἔργον but idleness (ἀεργίη) that is
a reproach. Get wealth[74] by working, and the idler will want to rival
you: honour and glory attend on wealth. Avoid delays[75] and vain talk:
the procrastinator is never sure of a living; for he is always hoping,
when he should act. Whether sowing or ploughing or mowing, off with
your outer[76] garment, if you mean to get your farm-duties done in due
season. The farmer must rise early, and never get behindhand with his
work: to be in time, and never caught napping by changes of weather, is
his duty.

Here is a picture of humble and strenuous life, very different from the
scenes portrayed in the ‘heroic’ epics. It seems to belong to a later and
less warlike age. But the economic and social side of life is in many
respects little changed. The free handicraftsmen seem much the same.
Jealousy of rivals[77] in the same trade—potter, carpenter, beggar, or
bard—is a touch that attests their freedom. The smith, the weaver, the
shoemaker, and the shipwright, are mentioned[78] also. Seafaring[79] for
purposes of gain illustrates what men will dare in quest of wealth. You
should not cast a man’s poverty[80] in his teeth: but do not fancy that
men will give you[81] of their store, if you and your family fall into
poverty. Clearly the beggar is not more welcome than he was in the world
of the Odyssey. Suppliant and stranger are protected[82] by religion, and
a man should honour his aged father, if he would see good days. A motive
suggested for careful service of the gods is ‘that you may buy another’s
estate[83] and not another buy yours’—that is, that the gods may give
you increase. Just so you should keep a watch-dog, that thieves[84] may
not steal your goods by night. Hesiod’s farmer is to keep the social and
religious rules and usages—but he is before all things a keen man of
business, no Roman more so.

The labour employed by this close-fisted countryman is partly free
partly slave. In a passage[85] of which the exact rendering is disputed
the hired man (θῆτα) and woman (ἔριθον) are mentioned as a matter of
course. For a helper (ἀνδρὶ φίλῳ)[86] his wage must be secure (ἄρκιος)
as stipulated. References to slaves (δμῶες)[87] are more frequent, and
the need of constant watchfulness, to see that they are not lazy and are
properly fed housed and rested, is insisted on. The feeding of cattle and
slaves is regulated according to their requirements in different seasons
of the year: efficiency is the object, and evidently experience is the
guide. Of female slaves there is no certain[88] mention: indeed there
could be little demand for domestic attendants in the farmer’s simple
home. Such work as weaving[89] is to be done by his wife. For the farmer
is to marry, though the risks[90] of that venture are not hidden from
the poet, who gives plain warnings as to the exercise of extreme care in
making a suitable choice. The operations of agriculture are the usual
ploughing sowing reaping threshing and the processes of the vineyard and
the winepress. Oxen sheep and mules form the live-stock. Corn is the
staple[91] diet, with hay as fodder for beasts.

Looking on the picture as a whole, we see that the Hesiodic farmer is to
be a model of industry and thrift. Business, not sentiment, is the note
of his character. His function is to survive in his actual circumstances;
that is, in a social and economic environment of normal selfishness. If
his world is not a very noble one, it is at least eminently practical.
He is a true αὐτουργός, setting his own hand to the plough, toiling for
himself on his own land, with slaves and other cattle obedient to his
will. It is perhaps not too much to say that he illustrates a great
truth bearing on the labour-question,—that successful exploitation of
other men’s labour is, at least in semi-primitive societies, only to
be achieved by the man who shares the labour himself. And it is to be
noted that he attests the existence of wage-earning hands as well as
slaves. I take this to mean that there were in his rustic world a number
of landless freemen compelled to make a living as mere farm labourers.
That we hear so much less of this class in later times is probably to be
accounted for by the growth of cities and the absorption of such persons
in urban occupations and trades.


V. STRAY NOTES FROM EARLY POETS.

A few fragments may be cited as of interest, bearing on our subject.
The most important are found in the remains[92] of Solon, illustrating
the land-question as he saw and faced it at the beginning of the sixth
century BC. The poets of the seventh and sixth centuries reflect the
problems of an age of unrest, among the causes of which the introduction
of metallic coinage, susceptible of hoarding and unaffected by weather,
played a great part. Poverty, debt and slavery of debtors, hardship,
begging, the insolence and oppression of rich and greedy creditors, are
common topics. The sale of free men into slavery abroad is lamented by
Solon, who claims to have restored many such victims by his measures of
reform. In particular, he removed encumbrances on land, thus setting
free the small farmers who were in desperate plight owing to debt. The
exact nature and scope of his famous reform is a matter of dispute.
Whether he relieved freeholders from a burden of debt, or emancipated
the clients[93] of landowning nobles from dependence closely akin to
serfdom, cannot be discussed here, and does not really bear on the matter
in hand. In either case the persons relieved were a class of working
farmers, and the economic reform was the main thing: political reform was
of value as tending to secure the economic boon. It is remarkable that
Solon, enumerating a number of trades (practically the old Homeric and
Hesiodic list), speaks of them merely as means of escaping the pressure
of poverty, adding ‘and another man[94] is yearly servant to those
interested in ploughing, and furrows land planted with fruit-trees.’ This
man seems to be a wage-earner (θὴς) working for a large farmer, probably
the owner of a landed estate in the rich lowland (πεδιάς) of Attica. The
small farmers were mostly confined to the rocky uplands. Evidently it is
not manual labour that is the hardship, but the dependent position of
the hired man working on another’s land. The hard-working independent
peasant, willing to till stony land for his own support, is the type that
Solon encouraged and Peisistratus[95] approved.

The life of such peasant farmers was at best a hard one, and little
desired by men living under easier conditions. Two fragments from Ionia
express views of dwellers in that rich and genial land. =Phocylides= of
Miletus in one of his wise counsels says ‘if you desire wealth, devote
your care to a fat farm (πίονος ἀγροῦ), for the saying is that a farm is
a horn of plenty.’ The bitter =Hipponax= of Ephesus describes a man as
having lived a gluttonous life and so eaten up his estate (τὸν κλῆρον):
the result is that he is driven to dig a rocky hillside and live on
common figs and barley bread—mere slave’s fodder (δούλιον χόρτον). Surely
the ‘fat farm’ was not meant to be worked by the owner singlehanded; and
the ‘slave’s fodder’ suggests the employment of slaves. Ionia was a home
of luxury and ease.

The oft-quoted scolion of the Cretan =Hybrias= illustrates the point
of view of the warrior class in more military communities. His wealth
is in sword spear and buckler. It is with these tools that he does his
ploughing reaping or vintage. That is, he has command of the labour of
others, and enjoys their produce. We shall speak below of the well-known
lords and serfs of Crete.


VI. TRACES OF SERFDOM IN GREEK STATES.

Before passing on to the times in which the merits of a free
farmer-class, from military and political points of view, became a
matter of general and conscious consideration, it is desirable to refer
briefly to the recorded cases of agricultural serfdom in Greek states.
For the rustic serf is a type quite distinct from the free farmer, the
hired labourer, or the slave; though the language of some writers is
loose, and does not clearly mark the distinction. Six well-known cases
present themselves, in connexion with Sparta, Crete, Argos, Thessaly,
Syracuse, and Heraclea on the Pontus. Into the details of these systems
it is not necessary to enter, interesting though many of them are. The
important feature common to them all is the delegation of agricultural
labour. A stronger or better-organized people become masters of a weaker
population, conquering their country by force of arms, and sparing the
conquered on certain terms. The normal effect of the compact is that the
conquerors are established as a ruling warrior class, whose subsistence
is provided by the labour of the subject people. These subjects remain
on the land as farmers, paying a fixed quota of their produce to their
masters. Some are serfs of the state, and pay their dues to the state
authorities: some are serfs of individuals, and pay to their lords.
In either case they are strictly attached to the land, and cannot be
sold out of the country. This clearly marks off the serf from the slave
held in personal bondage. In some cases certainly, probably in all, the
warrior class (at least the wealthier of them) had also slaves for their
own personal service. The serf-system differs from a caste-system. Both,
it is true, are hereditary systems, or have a strong tendency to become
so. The ruling class do not easily admit deserving subjects into their
own ranks. And they take precautions to hinder the degradation of their
equals into lower conditions through poverty. The warrior’s land-lot
(κλᾶρος), the sale of which is forbidden, is a favourite institution
for the purpose. That such warrior aristocracies could not be kept up
in vigour for an indefinite time, was to be proved by experience. Their
duration depended on external as well as internal conditions. Hostile
invasion might destroy the efficiency of state regulations, however
well adapted to keep the serfs under control. Sparta always feared her
Helots, and it was essential to keep an enemy out of Laconia. Early in
the history of Syracuse the unprivileged masses were supported by the
serfs in their rising against the squatter-lords, the γαμόροι whose great
estates represented the allotments of the original settlers. In Crete
and Thessaly matters were complicated by lack of a central authority.
There were a number of cities: subordination and cooperation were alike
hard to secure, and the history of both groups is a story of jealousy,
collisions, and weakness. The Thessalian Penestae often rebelled. The two
classes of Cretan[96] serfs (public and private) were kept quiet partly
by rigid exclusion from all training of a military kind, partly by their
more favourable condition: but the insular position of Crete was perhaps
a factor of equal importance. The long control of indigenous barbarian
serfs by the city of Heraclea was probably the result of similar causes.

But in all these cases it is conquest that produces the relation between
the tiller of the soil and his overlord. Whether the serf is regarded
as a weaker Greek or as a Barbarian (non-Greek) is not at present the
main question from my point of view. The notion of castes, belonging
to the same society and influenced by the same racial and religious
traditions, but each performing a distinct function—priestly military
agricultural etc.—as in ancient India, is another thing altogether. Caste
separates functions, but the division is in essence collateral. Serfdom
is a delegation of functions, and is a compulsory subordination. That
the Greeks of the seventh and sixth centuries BC were already becoming
conscious of a vital difference between other races and themselves, is
fairly certain. It was soon to express itself in the common language.
Contact with Persia was soon to crystallize this feeling into a moral
antipathy, a disgust and contempt that found voice in the arrogant claim
that while nature’s law justifies the ruling of servile Barbarians by
free Greeks, a reversal of the relation is an unnatural monstrosity. Yet
I cannot discover that Greeks ever gave up enslaving brother Greeks.
Callicratidas in the field and Plato in his school might protest against
the practice; it still remained the custom in war to sell as slaves
those, Greek or Barbarian, whom the sword had spared. We shall also find
cases in which the remnant of the conquered were left in their homes but
reduced to the condition of cultivating serfs.

Among the little that is known of the ancient Etruscans, whose power was
once widely extended in Italy, is the fact that they dwelt in cities and
ruled a serf population who lived chiefly in the country. The ruling
race were apparently invaders not akin to any of the Italian stocks:
their subjects probably belonged to the old Ligurian race, in early times
spread over a large part of the peninsula. That the Etruscan cities
recognized a common interest, but in practice did not support each other
consistently, was the chief cause of their gradual weakening and final
fall. Noble lords with warlike traditions had little bent for farm life
or sympathy with the serfs who tilled the soil. The two classes seem to
have kept to their own[97] languages, and the Etruscan gradually died out
under the supremacy of Rome.


VII. HERODOTUS.

=Herodotus=, writing in the first half of the fifth century BC, partly
recording the results of his own travels, partly dependent on the
work of his predecessors, is a witness of great value. In him we find
the contrast and antipathy[98] of Greek and Barbarian an acknowledged
fact, guiding and dominating Greek sentiment. Unhappily he yields us
very little evidence bearing on the present subject. To slavery and
slave-trade he often refers without comment: these are matters of
course. The servile character of oriental peoples subject to Persia is
contemptuously described[99] through the mouth of the Greek queen of
Halicarnassus. Nor does he spare the Ionian Greeks, whose jealousies and
consequent inefficiency made them the unworthy tools of Persian ambition;
a sad contrast to those patriotic Greeks of old Hellas who, fired by
the grand example of Athens, fought for their freedom and won it in the
face of terrible odds. The disgust—a sort of physical loathing—with
which the free Greek, proud of training his body to perfection, regarded
corporal mutilation as practised in the East, is illustrated by such
passages[100] as that in which the Persians are astounded at the Greek
athletic competitions for a wreath of olive leaves, and that in which he
coolly tells the story of the eunuch’s revenge. But all this, interesting
as giving us his point of view, does not help us in clearing up the
relations of free and slave labour. As for handicrafts, it is enough
to refer to the well-known passage[101] in which, while speaking of
Egypt, he will not decide whether the Greeks got their contempt for
manual trades from the Egyptians or not. That the Greeks, above all the
Spartans, do despise χειρωναξίαι, is certain; but least true of the
Corinthians. Barbarians in general respect the warrior class among their
own folk and regard manual trades as ignoble. So the source of Greek
prejudice is doubtful. That the craftsmen are free is clear from the
whole context. It is remarkable that in enumerating seven classes of the
Egyptian population he mentions no class[102] as devoted to the tillage
of the soil, but two of herdsmen, in charge of cattle and swine. Later
authorities mention[103] the γεωργοί, and connect them with the military
class, rightly, it would seem: for Herodotus[104] refers to the farms
granted by the kings to this class. They are farmer-soldiers. It would
seem that they were free, so far as any Egyptian could be called free,
and worked their land themselves. If this inference be just, we may
observe that a Greek thought it a fact worth noting. Was this owing to
the contrast[105] offered by systems of serfage in the Greek world?

It is curious that wage-labour is hardly ever directly mentioned. In
describing[106] the origin of the Macedonian kings, who claimed descent
from an Argive stock, he says that three brothers, exiles from Argos,
came to Macedon. There they served the king for wages as herdsmen in
charge of his horses cattle sheep and goats. The simplicity of the royal
household is emphasized as illustrating the humble scale of ancient
monarchies. Alarmed by a prodigy, the king calls his servants (τοὺς
θῆτας) and tells them to leave his country. The sequel does not concern
us here: we need only note that work for wages is referred to as a
matter of course. The same relation is probably meant in the case of the
Arcadian deserters[107] who came to Xerxes after Thermopylae, in need of
sustenance (βίου) and wishing to get work (ἐνεργοὶ εἶναι). But the term
θητεύειν is not used. And the few Athenians who stayed behind[108] in the
Acropolis when Athens was evacuated, partly through sheer poverty (ὑπ’
ἀσθενείης βίου), would seem to be θῆτες. It is fair to infer that hired
labour is assumed as a normal fact in Greek life. For the insistence on
poverty[109] as naturally endemic (σύντροφος) in Hellas, only overcome by
the manly qualities (ἀρετὴ) developed in the conquest of hard conditions
by human resourcefulness (σοφίη), shews us the background of the picture
present to the writer’s mind. It is his way of telling us that the
question of food-supply was a serious one. Out of her own soil Hellas was
only able to support a thin population. Hence Greek forces were absurdly
small compared with the myriads of Persia: but the struggle for existence
had strung them up to such efficiency and resolute love of freedom that
they were ready to face fearful odds.

The passage occurs in the reply of Demaratus the Spartan to a question of
Xerxes, and refers more particularly to Sparta. In respect of courage
and military efficiency the claim is appropriate: but poverty was surely
characteristic of nearly all the European Hellas, and the language on
that point is strictly correct, probably representing the writer’s
own view. It is also quite consistent with the statement[110] that in
early times, before the Athenians had as yet driven all the indigenous
population out of Attica, neither the Athenians nor the Greeks generally
had slaves (οἰκέτας). The context seems to indicate that domestic slaves
are specially meant. I do not lay much stress on this allegation, urged
as it is in support of a case by one party to the dispute: but it is a
genuine tradition, which appears again in the later literature. In the
time of Herodotus there were plenty of domestic slaves. Accordingly he
finds it worth while to mention[111] that Scythian kings are attended by
persons of their own race, there being no bought servants employed.

Herodotus is a difficult witness to appraise justly, partly from the
occasional uncertainty as to whether he is really pledging his own
authority on a point, partly because the value of his authority varies
greatly on different points. But on the whole I take his evidence
to suggest that agriculture was carried on in Greece either by free
labouring farmers employing hired men when needed, or by serfs. I do not
see any evidence to shew that no slaves were employed. The subject of his
book placed him under no necessity of mentioning them: and I can hardly
believe that farm-slavery on a small scale had died out all over Greece
since the days of Hesiod. Nor do I feel convinced on his authority that
the poverty of Greece was, so far as mere food is concerned, as extreme
as he makes Demaratus represent it. When the Spartans heard that Xerxes
was offering the Athenians a separate peace, they were uneasy, and sent
a counter-offer[112] on their own behalf. Not content with appealing to
the Hellenic patriotism of Athens, they said ‘We feel for you in your
loss of two crops and the distress that will last some while yet. But
you shall have all this made good. We, Spartans and confederates, will
find food for your wives and your helpless families[113] so long as this
war lasts.’ Supposing this offer to have been actually made, and to have
been capable of execution, surely it implies that there were food-stuffs
to spare in the Peloponnese. It may be that I am making too much of this
passage, and of the one about poverty. The dramatic touch of Herodotus
is present in both, and I must leave the apparent inconsistency between
them as it stands. The question of Peloponnesian agriculture will come up
again in connexion with a passage of Thucydides.


VIII. THE TRAGEDIANS.

The lives of =Aeschylus= (died 456 BC) =Sophocles= and =Euripides= (both
died 406 BC) cover a period of stirring events in the history of Greece,
particularly of Athens. =Aeschylus= had borne his part in the Persian
wars: he was a fighting man when Herodotus was born, and Sophocles a
boy. Euripides saw the rise of Athenian power to its greatest height,
and died with Sophocles on the eve of its fall. These men had seen
strange and terrible things. Hellas had only beaten off the Persian to
ruin herself by her own internecine conflicts. While the hatred and
contempt for ‘barbarians’ grew from sentiment into something very like
a moral principle, Greeks butchered or enslaved brother Greeks on an
unprecedented scale. Greek lands were laid waste by Greek armies: the
devastation of Attica in particular had serious effects on the politics
and policy of Athens. Athens at length lost her control of the Euxine
corn trade and was starved out. For the moment a decision was reached:
the reactionary rural powers, backed by the commercial jealousy of
Corinth, had triumphed. No thoughtful man in Athens during the time when
the rustic population were crowded into the city, idle and plagued with
sickness, could be indifferent to the strain on democratic institutions.
This spectacle suggested reflexions that permanently influenced Greek
thought on political subjects. The tendency was to accept democracy
in some form and degree as inevitable in most states, and to seek
salvation in means of checking the foolish extravagancies of mob-rule.
The best of these means was the encouragement of farmer-citizens: but
the circumstances of Greek history made practical success on these lines
impossible. In practice, oligarchy meant privilege, to which a scattered
farming population would submit; democracy meant mob-rule sooner or
later, and the dominance of urban interests. The problem which Plato and
Aristotle could not solve was already present in the latter part of the
Peloponnesian war. Aristophanes might ridicule Euripides, but on the
country-and-town issue the two were agreed.

=Aeschylus= indeed furnishes very little to my purpose directly.
The Greek antipathy to the Barbarian is very clearly marked; but
the only points worth noting are that in the _Persae_[114] he makes
Persian speakers refer to their own people as βάρβαροι, and that in a
bitter passage of the _Eumenides_ he expresses[115] his loathing of
mutilations and tortures, referring no doubt to Persian cruelties.
Agriculture can hardly be said to be mentioned at all, for the gift
of weather-wisdom[116] is useful to others than the farmer, and the
Scythian steppes are untilled land. A fragment, telling of a happy
land[117] where all things grow in plenty unsown without ploughing or
digging, reminds us of the Odyssey, minus the savages: another, referring
to the advance made in domestication of beasts to relieve men of toil,
make up the meagre list. All are in connexion with Prometheus. There are
two interesting passages[118] in which the word γαμόρος (landholder)
occurs, but merely as an expression for a man with the rights and
responsibilities of a citizen. There is nothing of tillage. It was
natural for the champion of the power of the Areopagus to view the
citizen from the landholding side. He is a respecter of authority, but at
the same time lays great stress on the duty and importance of deference
to public opinion. This tone runs through the surviving plays, wherever
the scene of a particular drama may be laid. Athenian conditions are
always in his mind, and his final judgment appears in the _Eumenides_
as an appeal to all true citizens to combine freedom with order. Ties
of blood, community of religious observances, the relation between
citizens and aliens, are topics on which he dwells again and again. In
general it is fair to conclude that, while he cheerfully accepted the
free constitution of Athens as it stood since the democratic reform
of Cleisthenes, he thought that it was quite democratic enough, and
regarded more recent tendencies with some alarm. Now these tendencies, in
particular the reforms of Ephialtes and Pericles, were certainly in the
direction of lessening the influence of the Attic farmers and increasing
that of the urban citizens, who were on the spot to take advantage of
them. To put it in the briefest form, Aeschylus must be reckoned an
admirer of the solid and responsible citizens of the old school, men with
a stake in the country.

=Sophocles= also supplies very little. The antipathy of Greeks to
Barbarians appears in a milder form: Aeschylus was naturally more
bitter, having fought against the Persian invader. The doctrine that
public opinion (of citizens) ought to be respected, that obedience to
constituted authorities is a duty, in short the principle that freedom
should be combined with order, is set forth in various passages of
dramatic debate. Yet the scenes of the plays, as those of Aeschylus, are
laid in legendary ages that knew not democracy. The awful potency of ties
of blood, and the relations of citizen and alien, are topics common to
both. But I think it may fairly be said that political feeling is less
evident in Sophocles. This is consistent with his traditional character.
In their attitude towards slavery there is no striking difference: both
treat it as a matter of course. But in Sophocles there are already
signs[119] of the questioning that was soon to become outspoken, as to
the justice of the relation of master and slave. Agriculture is hardly
mentioned. The words γεωργός, γεωργεῖν, γεωργία, are (as in Aeschylus)
not used. A reference to ploughing occurs in a famous passage[120]
celebrating the resourcefulness of Man. The herdsman, usually a slave, is
once[121] spoken of as perhaps a hired servant. One curious passage[122]
calls for notice. In the _Trachiniae_ the indifference of Heracles to
his children is compared by his wife Deianira to the conduct of a farmer
(γῄτης) who has got a farm at a distance (ἄρουραν ἔκτοπον) and only
visits it at seed-time and harvest. The man is apparently a non-resident
landowner, living presumably in the city (surely Athens is in the poet’s
mind) and working his farm by deputy—a steward—and only inspecting it at
important seasons. Whether the labour employed is slave or free, there
is nothing to shew. It is of interest to find the situation sufficiently
real to be used in a simile. But I infer that the situation, like the
conduct of Heracles, is regarded as exceptional.

=Euripides= takes us into a very different atmosphere. An age of movement
was also an age of criticism and inquiry, social religious political
ethical. The intellectual leaders came from various parts of the Greek
world, but the intellectual centre of ‘obstinate questionings’ was
Athens, and their poet Euripides. The use of drama, with plots drawn
from ancient legend, as a vehicle for reflexions on human problems,
addressed to a contemporary audience and certain to evoke assent and
dissent, is the regular practice of Euripides. His plays give us a mass
of information as to the questions exercising the minds of thoughtful men
in a stirring period. The point of view is that of the new school, the
enlightened ‘thinkers’ who claimed the right to challenge traditional
principles, opinions, prejudices, and institutions, testing them by the
canons of human reason fearlessly applied. This attitude was naturally
resented by men of the old school, averse to any disturbing influence
tending to undermine the traditional morality, and certain to react
upon politics. Their opposition can still be traced in the comedies of
Aristophanes and in various political movements during the Peloponnesian
war. Among the topics to which the new school turned their attention were
two of special interest to Euripides. The power of wealth was shewing
itself in the growth of capitalistic enterprise, an illustration of
which is seen in the case of the rich slaveowner Nicias. Poverty[123]
and its disadvantages, sometimes amounting to sheer degradation, was as
ever a subject of discontent: and this was closely connected with the
position of free wage-earning labour. At Athens political action took a
strong line in the direction of utilizing the wealth of the rich in the
service of the state: for the poor, its dominant tendency was to provide
opportunities of drawing state pay (μισθός), generally a bare living
wage, for the performance of various public duties. The other topic, that
of slavery, had as yet hardly reached the stage of questioning the right
or wrong of that institution as such. But the consciousness that the
slave, like his master, was a blend of human virtues and human vices,—was
a man, in short,—was evidently becoming clearer, and suggesting the
conclusion that he must be judged as a man and not as a mere chattel.
Otherwise Euripides would hardly have ventured to bring slaves on the
stage[124] in so sympathetic a spirit, or to utter numerous sayings,
bearing on their merits and failings, in a tone of broad humanity.

In such circumstances how came it that there was no sign of a movement
analogous to modern Abolitionism? If the slave was confessedly a man,
had he not the rights of a man? The answer is plain. That a man, simply
as a man, had any rights, was a doctrine not yet formulated or clearly
conceived. The antipathy[125] between Greek and Barbarian was a practical
bar to its recognition. The Persian was not likely to moderate his
treatment of Greeks in his power from any such consideration: superior
force, nothing less, would induce him to conform to Greek notions of
humanity. While force was recognized as the sole foundation of right
as against free enemies, there could not be much serious doubt as to
the right of holding aliens in slavery. But in this questioning age
another theoretical basis of discussion had been found. Men were testing
institutions by asking in reference to each ‘is it a natural[126] growth?
does it exist by nature (φύσει)? or is it a conventional status? does it
exist by law (νόμῳ)?’ Here was one of the most unsettling inquiries of
the period. In reference to slavery we find two conflicting doctrines
beginning to emerge. One is[127] that all men are born free (φύσει) and
that slavery is therefore a creation of man’s device (νόμῳ). The other is
that superior strength is a gift of nature, and therefore the rule of the
weaker[128] by the stronger is according to nature. The conflict between
these two views was destined to engage some of the greatest minds of
Greece in later years, when the political failure of the Greek states
had diverted men’s thoughts to problems concerning the individual. For
the present slavery was taken for granted, but it is evident that the
seeds of future doubt had been sown. Among the stray utterances betraying
uneasiness is the oft-quoted saying[129] of the sophist Alcidamas ‘god
leaves all men free: nature makes no man a slave.’ The speaker was
contemporary with Euripides, whose sayings are often in much the same
tone, if less direct. A remarkable passage is that in which he makes
Heracles repudiate[130] the myths that represent slavery as existing
among the gods. No god that is a real god has any needs, and such tales
are rubbish—an argument that was destined to reappear later as bearing
upon slavery among men, particularly in connexion with the principles of
the Cynic school.

I have said enough as to the point of view from which the questioners,
such as Euripides, regarded slavery. It is somewhat surprising that
the poet’s references to hired labour[131] are very few, and all of a
depressing kind, treating θητεύειν as almost or quite equivalent to
δουλεύειν. The references or allusions to handicrafts are hardly to
the point: such men are doubtless conceived as θῆτες, but they would
generally direct themselves in virtue of their trade-skill: they are not
hired ‘hands.’ Herdsmen often appear, but generally if not always they
seem to be slaves or serfs. Nor is it clear that the digger (σκαφεύς)
is free; he is referred to[132] as a specimen of the meanest class
of labourer. But in three of the plays there occur passages directly
descriptive of the poor working farmer, the αὐτουργὸς of whom I have
spoken above. In the _Electra_, the prologue is put in the mouth of
the poor but well-born αὐτουργὸς to whom the crafty Aegisthus has
given Electra in marriage. The scene between husband and wife is one
of peculiar delicacy and interest. The points that concern us here
are these. The princess has been united[133] to a poor and powerless
freeman. He is fully occupied[134] with the hard labour of his farm,
which he apparently cultivates singlehanded. He understands the motive of
Aegisthus, and shews his respect for Electra by refraining from conjugal
rights. She in turn respects his nobility, and shews her appreciation by
cheerfully performing[135] the humble duties of a cottar’s wife. When
the breadwinner (ἐργάτης) comes home from toil, he should find all ready
for his comfort. He is shocked to see her, a lady of gentle breeding (εὖ
τεθραμμένη) fetch water from the spring and wait upon his needs. But he
has to accept the situation: the morrow’s dawn[136] shall see him at his
labour on the land: it is all very well to pray for divine aid, but
to get a living the first thing needful is to work. Now here we have a
picture of the free farmer on a small scale, who lives in a hovel and
depends on the labour of his own hands. He is the ancient analogue of
the French peasant, who works harder than any slave, and whose views
are apt to be limited by the circumstances of his daily life. He has no
slaves[137]. Again, the Theban herald in the _Supplices_[138], speaking
of the incapacity of a Demos for the function of government, says ‘but
a poor husbandman (γαπόνος ἀνὴρ πένης), even if not stupid, will be
too busy to attend to state affairs.’ Here is our toiling rustic, the
ideal citizen of statesmen who desire to keep free from popular control.
The same character appears again in the _Orestes_, on the occasion of
a debate in the Argive Assembly (modelled on Athens), as defender of
Orestes. He is described[139] as ‘not of graceful mien, but a manly
fellow, one who seldom visits the city and the market-place, a toiler
with his hands (αὐτουργός), of the class on whom alone the safety of the
country depends; but intelligent and prepared to face the conflict of
debate, a guileless being of blameless life.’ So vivid is this portrait,
that the sympathy of the poet with the rustic type of citizen can hardly
be ignored. Now, why did Euripides take pains to shew this sympathy? I
take it to be a sign that he saw with regret the declining influence of
the farmer class in Attic politics.

Can we go a step further, and detect in these passages any sort of
protest against a decline in the number of small working farmers, and
a growth of exploitation-farming, carried on by stewards directing the
labour of slaves or hired hands? In the next generation we find this
system in use, as indeed it most likely always had been to some extent
on the richer soils of lowland Attica. The concentration of the country
folk in the city during the great war would tend to promote agriculture
by deputy after the return of peace. Deaths, and the diversion of some
farmers to other pursuits, were likely to leave vacancies in the rural
demes. Speculators who took advantage of such chances to buy land
would not as a rule do so with intent to live on the land and work it
themselves; and aliens were not allowed to hold real estate. It seems
fairly certain that landlords resident in Athens, to whom land was
only one of many forms of investment, and who either let their land to
tenant-farmers or exploited its cultivation under stewards, were a class
increased considerably by the effects of the war. We shall see further
reasons below for believing this. Whether Euripides in the passages cited
above is actually warning or protesting, I do not venture to say: that
he grasped the significance of a movement beginning under his very eyes,
is surely a probable conjecture.

That we should hear little of the employment of slaves in the hard
work of agriculture, even if the practice were common, is not to be
wondered at. Assuming the existence of slavery, there was no need for
any writer other than a specialist to refer to them. But we have in
the _Rhesus_ a passage[140] in which Hector forecasts the result of an
attack on the Greeks while embarking: some of them will be slain, and
the rest, captured and made fast in bonds, will be taught to cultivate
(γαπονεῖν) the fields of the Phrygians. That this use of captives is
nothing extraordinary appears below, when Dolon the spy is bargaining
for a reward in case of success. To a suggestion that one of the Greek
chiefs should be assigned to him he replies ‘No, hands gently nurtured
(εὖ ’τεθραμμέναι)[141] are unfit for farm-work (γεωργεῖν).’ The notion
of captive Greeks slaving on the land for Asiatic lords is a touch meant
to be provocative of patriotic indignation. And the remark of Dolon
would surely fall more meaningly on the ears of men acquainted with the
presence of rustic slavery in their own country. To serfage we have a
reference[142] in the _Heraclidae_, but the retainer (πενέστης) is under
arms, ‘mobilized,’ not at the time working on the land. His reward, when
he brings the news of victory, is to be freedom.


IX. THE ‘CONSTITUTION OF ATHENS’ OR ‘OLD OLIGARCH.’

One of the most remarkable documents that have come down to us bearing
upon Athenian politics is the ‘Constitution[143] of Athens’ wrongly
assigned to Xenophon. It is certainly the work of an earlier writer,
and the date of its composition can be fixed as between 430 and 424 BC.
Thus it refers to the first years of the Peloponnesian war, during which
Attica was repeatedly invaded, its rural economy upset, and the manifold
consequences of overcrowding in the city of refuge were beginning to
shew themselves. Not a few of the ‘better classes’ of Athenian citizens
(οἱ βέλτιστοι) were dissatisfied with the readiness of the Demos,
under the guidance of Pericles, to carry out a maritime and aggressive
policy abroad at the cost of sacrificing rural interests at home. For
the sacrifice fell on the landowners, more particularly on the larger
owners: the compensations[144] of state-pay and chances of plunder might
suffice for the peasant farmer driven into Athens. At the same time
it was undeniable that the astounding energy displayed by democratic
Athens had surprised the Greek world; and the most discontented Athenian
could hardly suppress an emotion of patriotic pride. The writer of the
pamphlet before us—for a pamphlet it is—was under the influence of these
conflicting feelings. Whether it is right to describe him as an Oligarch
depends on what that term is taken to connote. That he would greatly
prefer a system[145] under which the educated orderly and honest citizens
should enjoy greater consideration and power, is evident: also that in
his view these qualities are normal attributes of the wealthier classes.
For he finds in poverty the main cause[146] of democratic misdeeds.
That the masses are ill-informed and lack judgment and self-control,
is the result of their preoccupation with necessities of daily life.
But from this conviction to aiming at a serious oligarchic revolution
is a long step. The democracy in its less aggressive form, before the
recent developments owing to the presence of an idle refugee population,
might conceivably have sufficed for his requirements. He is a prejudiced
contemporary witness, frank and cynical in the extreme, praising the
Demos for doing the very things that he hates and despises, because those
things are in the interest of the democracy such as it appears to him:
they would be fools to act otherwise. For convenience sake I follow Mr
Zimmern[147] in calling him the _Old Oligarch_.

His disgust at the lack of discipline in the slaves at Athens, and his
ingenious explanation[148] of the causes that have led to toleration of
the nuisance, are very characteristic of his whole attitude. But the
slaves of whom he speaks are those labourers whom their owners allowed
to work for hire in the city and Peiraeus, taking a share of their pay
as rent for their services. Perhaps the state slaves are meant also. He
admits that you have to put up with the airs of these fellows, who often
become men of substance (πλούσιοι δοῦλοι) and think themselves as good
as the citizens. Truth is, the master depends on the return he gets from
his investment: if the rent comes in regularly, he asks no questions
and the slave is given[149] a free hand. No wonder the bondman jostles
his betters in the public streets, a state of things inconceivable in
orderly Sparta. Now on the face of it this picture has nothing to do with
the agricultural situation. But let us look further. The stress of the
great war had increased the city population. The increased demand for
imported food-stuffs and for materials of war (such as ship-timber) had
undoubtedly increased the demand for dock-labourers, boatmen, porters,
carters, and other ‘hands.’ Male citizens had enough to do in services by
land and sea. From what source was the extra force of rough able-bodied
labour recruited? Is it likely that a number of raw barbarian slaves
were imported for the purpose? I think not; time would be needed to make
them efficient, and the available shipping had already a difficult task
to keep up the supply of indispensable goods. Is it not much more likely
that rustic slaves, brought into Athens by their owners, were turned to
account[150] in another department of labour, thus earning wages for
themselves while they maintained their masters? The probability of this
view will depend largely on proof that rustic slaves were employed in
Attica under normal conditions at this time. We shall presently see how
the evidence of Aristophanes bears on the point.

Meanwhile let us see what references to agriculture are to be found
in this pamphlet. In speaking of the nautical skill[151] now a common
accomplishment among Athenians, the writer remarks that the possession
of estates abroad, and the duties of offices concerned with external
affairs, have something to do with it. Men have to cross the water: they
and their attendants (ἀκόλουθοι) thus pick up skill by experience without
intending it: for it happens time and again that both master and slave
(καὶ αὐτὸν καὶ τὸν οἰκέτην) have to take a turn at the oar. The estates
referred to are chiefly state-lands allotted to Athenian cleruchs in
confiscated districts, but also private properties. The voyages to and
fro are nothing exceptional. Whether a man resided on his estate and had
need to visit Athens, or whether he resided in Athens and had to visit
his estate from time to time, he must go to sea. It is to be borne in
mind that allottees in cleruchies often let their lands to the former
owners as tenants. In another passage[152] he points out the disadvantage
to Athens, as a maritime power, of not being on an island and so secure
from invasion. ‘As things are, those Athenians who farm land or are
wealthy (οἱ γεωργοῦντες καὶ οἱ πλούσιοι) are more inclined to conciliate
the enemy (ὑπέρχονται = cringe to), while the Demos, well aware that
their own belongings are in no danger of destruction, is unconcerned and
defiant.’ A notable admission, confirmed by other evidence, as we shall
see. It is to be observed that farmers and wealthy men are coupled
together. The class more especially meant are probably those represented
in Aristophanes by the substantial farmers of the _Peace_. But
capitalists with investments in land are also included, and small-holders
or tenants; these last working the land themselves, but not necessarily
without employing hired or slave labour.


X. ARISTOPHANES.

=Aristophanes= is a witness of great importance. Of eleven surviving
plays the _Acharnians_ appeared in 425 BC, the _Plutus_ in 388. Thus
we have from this prince of wit and humour a series of comments on the
social and political life of Athens and Attica from the point of view
of conservative admirers of good old times. The evidence of Comedy is
liable to be suspect, on the ground of a tendency to exaggerate and
distort facts: but to make allowances for this tendency is not a task
of extreme difficulty. Nor can it fairly be said that the political
bias of the poet is such as to deprive his evidence of all authority.
If he seems at times to be singularly detached from the prejudices of
the war-party, dominating Athens under the democratic leaders, and able
to discern and boldly to declare that the right was not solely on their
own side in the war; still he was a warm patriot, devoted to the Athens
whose defects he could not ignore. Among the striking events of the time
nothing seems to have impressed him more forcibly than the devastation
of Attica and the consequent ruin of the agricultural interest. That the
cooping-up of the rural population[153] within the walls month after
month was a progressive calamity, could hardly escape the notice of
any one then resident. It was not merely the squalor or the appalling
sickness, though these were in themselves enough to produce a terrible
strain. Discontent and recklessness took hold of the masses, and other
observers beside Aristophanes remarked the degeneration of the democracy.
Aristophanes was an opponent of the war-policy, and strove hard to rally
the farmer-folk in favour of peace. He spared no pains to discredit
the noisy demagogues, accusing them of prolonging the war in order to
retain or increase their own importance at the cost of the soundest
element in the civic body. But, while he turned the farmers’ grievances
to account in political advocacy, he was no mere unscrupulous partisan.
His frequent references to the homely joys of country life, sometimes
in sympathetic rural vignettes, have the ring of sincerity. Like many
another dweller in the unwholesome city, he sighed for the fresh air,
the wholesome food, the peace and quiet of Attic farmsteads: no doubt he
idealized the surroundings, though he did not depict them as scenes of
spotless innocence. But the details that drop out casually are often very
significant from the point of view of my inquiry, and very helpful as
giving us a genuine picture of the time.

On no point is information more to be desired than the relation of
agriculture to wealth. Is the typical farmer of the period a man of large
estate or not? We have seen that the ‘old oligarch’ classed together
the wealthy and the farmers as favouring a peace-policy. That such a
body of opinion, large or small, existed in Athens, is also suggested by
passages in Aristophanes. In the _Ecclesiazusae_, the play in which the
leader of the female politicians offers to cure distress by a communistic
scheme, we are told[154] that a proposal to mobilize a fleet divides the
Assembly: the poor man votes for it, but the wealthy and the farmers are
against it. I take it that, as in the case of the Sicilian expedition,
the man who wants to get paid for service (with a chance of profit)
supports the motion; those who dislike having to pay for the enterprise,
or see no way of profiting by it, are in opposition. This is a phenomenon
normal in politics, and does not tell us whether the ‘farmers’ are
cultivators on a large scale or small. Later in the play we find a
protest[155] against the iniquity of the present juxtaposition of wealth
and destitution, the state of things in which one man farms much land
while another has not enough to afford him a grave. Even a comic poet
would hardly put this into the mouth of one of his characters if there
were not some section of the audience to whom it might appeal. It is
probable that at the time (393-2 BC) communistic suggestions were among
the currents of opinion in humbled and impoverished Athens. To squeeze
the rich had long been the policy of the democrats, and a jealousy of
wealth in any form became endemic in the distressful city. A few years
later (388 BC) the poet gave in the _Plutus_ a pointed discussion[156] of
economic questions, ridiculing the notion that all could be rich at the
same time: for nobody would work, and so civilization would come to an
end. True, the individualistic bent of the average Athenian, grasping and
litigious, prevented the establishment of downright communism: but Athens
was henceforth never free from the jealous and hardly patriotic demands
of the clamorous poor We must remember that military service, no longer
offering prospects of profit in addition to pay, was becoming unpopular;
that land-allotments[157] in conquered territories had ceased; and that
agriculture in a large part of Attica was toilsome and unremunerative.
Poverty was widespread, and commerce declined: this implies that the
supply of slaves, and the money to buy them, would be reduced. Was there
then much to attract the poor man to the lonely tillage of a patch of
rocky land? The generation of small farmers before and during the great
war had some outlook for themselves and their sons, serving in victorious
armies or fleets, getting booty or allotments abroad. Hence they took a
keen interest in politics. The fall of Athens had changed all this: the
profits of empire had departed, and with them the buoyancy of an imperial
pride. No wonder if there were signs of unwillingness to follow a hard
rustic life. So the Informer in the _Plutus_[158], when asked ‘are you
a husbandman?’ replies ‘do you take me for a madman?’ Earlier in the
play[159] Chremylus, wishing to share with old cronies the profits of
having captured the god of wealth, says to his slave ‘invite my fellow
farmers: I fancy you’ll find them working themselves (αὐτοὺς) on their
farms.’

I have taken this later picture first, in order to bring out more clearly
the contrast presented by that given in the earlier plays. Naturally
enough, many details are the same in both, but the general character of
the farmers is different. The farmer class makes an important figure.
They are sturdy rustics[160], old-fashioned and independent, rough in
manners, fond of simple country life, and inclined (perhaps justly) to
mistrust the city folk, who cheat them in business whenever they can,
and take advantage of them in other ways, such as liability to military
service at short notice. When driven to take refuge in Athens, their
hearts are in their farms, and they have to make up their minds whether
to support the war-party in hope of regaining their homes and property
by force of arms, or to press for peace in order to end what is from
their point of view an unnecessary war, kept going in the interest of
demagogues and others who are profiting by the opportunities of offices
and campaigns abroad. The issue appears in our earliest play, the
_Acharnians_ (425 BC). The farmers of the deme Acharnae, one of whose
occupations was wood-cutting and charcoal-burning, at first come on as
stubborn rustics, all for war and revenge on the enemy. But Dicaeopolis
the chief character of the play, himself a farmer, and a sufferer in the
same kind by the Spartan raids, succeeds in persuading[161] them that
Athenian policy, provocative and grasping, is really to blame for their
losses. In the end they come over to his views, and the play serves as a
manifesto of the peace-party. Of course we are not to take it as history.
But the conflict between the two sections of opinion is probably real
enough. When Dicaeopolis describes[162] himself as ‘with my eyes ever
turned to my farm, a lover of peace, detesting the city and hankering
after my own deme, that never yet bade me buy charcoal or rough wine or
olive oil,’ he is giving us a portrait of the rustic who is resolved not
to part with cash for what can be produced on the farm.

But, whatever policy may seem best adapted to achieve their purpose, the
purpose itself is clearly and consistently marked. The desire of the
war-time farmers is simply to return to their farms[163] and to resume
the life of toil and plenty, varied by occasional festivals, that had
been interrupted by the war. They long to escape from the abominations
of the crowding and unhealthiness prevailing in the city. Once they get
back to their old surroundings, all will be well. Time and labour will
even repair the damages caused by the enemy. No misgivings suggest that
a change of circumstances may be found to have robbed Attic country
life of some of its charm. Nothing like the loss of the empire, the
fall of Athens, and the deadly depression of economic and political
life, is foreboded: they face the sequel with undisturbed faith in the
stability of the existing system. Nor indeed until the Sicilian disaster
(413 BC) was there much to cause uneasiness. So we find the same spirit
illustrated in the _Peace_ (421 BC), which may be regarded as driving
home the lesson of the _Acharnians_. The agricultural interests are now
represented as solidly in favour of the peace of Nicias, unsatisfactory
though it soon proved to be. While other interests are slack, indifferent
or even hostile, farmers are whole-hearted[164] in determination to
end the war and go home. Trygaeus their leader, according to the Greek
sketch of the plot an elderly rustic, describes himself[165] as a
‘skilled vine-dresser, one who is no informer or fomenter of troubles
(lawsuits).’ Needless to say, he carries his point, and the farmers march
off triumphant[166] to their farms, eager to take up the old easygoing
life once more. We must not take our comic poet too literally, but we
have no reason to doubt that feelings such as he depicts in this play did
prevail, and perhaps widely. And, though the peace was insincere, and
warfare never really ceased, the immunity of Attica from invasion for
several years gave time for agriculture to revive. When Agis occupied
Deceleia in the winter of 413, his marauders would find on the Attic
farms all manner of improvements and new plantations to destroy. And the
destruction of the fruits of a laborious revival is to be reckoned among
the depressing influences that weighed upon falling and desperate Athens.
It was surely at work in the year 411, when Aristophanes was preaching
a policy of concord at home and sympathetic treatment of the Allies in
order to save the shaken empire. In the _Lysistrata_ he represents the
mad war-fury of the Greek states as due to the misguided men, whom the
women coerce by privation into willingness for peace. This is strung up
into a passionate longing, so that neither[167] of the principal parties
is disposed to haggle over details. The Athenian breaks out ‘I want to
strip and work my land at once.’ The Spartan rejoins ‘and I want to be
carting manure.’ There is still no misgiving expressed, and the poet is
probably true to facts. The struggles of the time were a fearful strain
on Athenian resources, but it still seemed possible that the empire would
weather the storm.

This brief sketch leads on to the inquiry, what do we gather as to the
labour employed on the farms? We have to consider three possibilities
(_a_) the farmer, including his family, (_b_) hired labourers, (_c_)
slaves. It is well to begin by remarking that frequency of reference to
one of these does not necessarily imply the same proportion in actual
employment. Slavery being assumed as a fact in all departments of life
(as it is by all writers of the period), and the slave being an economic
or domestic appliance rather than a person, there was no need to call
special attention to his presence. Hence it is natural that the rustic
slave should, as such, be seldom referred to in the plays. He is in fact
mentioned several times, rather more often than the yoke of oxen. Nor was
it necessary to mention the wage-earner, the man employed for the job
under a temporary contract, and in connexion with agriculture he hardly
appears at all. But the working farmers were a class of citizens. They
had votes, and they were on political grounds a class to whose sympathies
the poet was anxious to appeal. Therefore he had no choice but to lay
stress upon their virtues and magnify their importance. Any careful
reader of Aristophanes will I think admit that he does this consistently.
In doing this with political aims he was subject to the temptation of
passing lightly over any considerations that might, whether justly or
unjustly, be turned against his case. This may serve to explain why he
refers almost solely to the small working farmer, who himself labours on
the land. We are not to infer that there were no large estates worked
by deputy, though probably there were not many: to lay stress on the
interested views of large landowners was not likely to please the jealous
Demos. Nor are we to infer that the small farmer used no slaves: that he
laboured himself is no proof, for no man could get more out of a slave’s
labour than the working owner, on whom the burden of making good his
slave’s neglect must fall. I turn now to the passages from which the
various details may be gleaned.

In the _Acharnians_ the working farmer Dicaeopolis is delighted at having
made a separate peace on his own account. He holds it a fine thing[168]
that he should now be able to perform religious rites and celebrate the
festival of the rustic Dionysia with his slaves. He is back at home[169]
in his own rural deme, and he calls his slave Xanthias to carry the
phallus in the procession. In the _Clouds_[170] old Strepsiades says that
he lives in the heart of the country, and his preference for the easy
and rather squalid life on a farm is plainly expressed. And the play
opens with his complaint that in war-time a man has not a free hand to
punish his slaves. It is however not clear that he is supposed to be at
the time living on the farm. In the _Wasps_ the chorus of old dicasts
are indignant[171] that their old comrade Philocleon should be dragged
off by his own slaves at the order of his son. The old man himself,
struggling and protesting, reminds the leading slave of the time when
he caught the rogue stealing grapes (obviously in his vineyard) and
thrashed him soundly. In the _Peace_ a rustic scene[172] is described.
The weather being unfavourable for work on the land, but excellent
for the seed just sown, it is proposed to make merry indoors. Country
fare is made ready, and the female slave Syra is told to call in the
man slave Manes from the farm. A little below Trygaeus is mocking the
workers in war-trades. To the trumpet-maker he says, fit up your trumpet
differently[173] and you can turn it into a weighing-machine: ‘it will
then do for serving out rations of figs to your slaves on the farm.’ In
the _Lysistrata_ the chorus, being aware that an interval of distress
will follow the conclusion of peace, offers[174] to tide over the crisis
by helping the fathers of large families and owners of hungry slaves
by doles of food. ‘Let them bring their bags and wallets for wheat: my
Manes shall fill them.’ After these passages the announcement of the
working of the communistic scheme[175] in the _Ecclesiazusae_ carries us
into a very different atmosphere. ‘But who is to till the soil under the
new order?’ asks Blepyrus. ‘Our slaves,’ replies Praxagora, his typical
better-half. We see that this amounts to basing society on a serf-system,
for the slaves will be common property like the rest. In the _Plutus_
old Chremylus is a farmer, apparently a working[176] farmer, but he has
a slave, indeed more than one. Age has probably led him to do most of
his work by deputy. When Poverty, in the course of her economic lecture,
explains to him[177] that wealth for all means slaves for none and that
he will have to plough and dig for his own proper sustenance, he is
indignant. The weak points of the argument do not concern us here. The
solution offered in the play, the cure of the Wealth-god’s blindness,
enabling him to enrich only the deserving, is a mere piece of sportive
nonsense, meant to amuse an audience, not to hold out a serious hope of
better things.

Enough has been said to shew that the slave had a place in farm life
as depicted by Aristophanes. It will be observed that in the earlier
plays the references are all of a casual kind: that is to say, that
slave-labour calls for no particular attention or remark. The
consideration of slave-labour as such, in fact as an economic phenomenon,
only appears later. This is, I repeat, significant of the change that
had come upon Athens and Attica in consequence of exhaustion. In respect
of hired labour it is obvious that pressure of poverty, as stated[178]
in the _Plutus_, directly influences the supply. If the possession
of a competency will deter men from professional industry in trades,
even more will it deter them from the drudgery of rough labour. The
hired men (μισθωτοί) were commonly employed in all departments, for
instance in the building trades, to which there is a reference[179] in
the _Birds_. But we may fairly assume that during the great war the
number of such ‘hands’ available for civilian services was much reduced.
In agriculture there would be little or no demand for them. And any
able-bodied citizen could earn good pay from the state. Moreover rough
labour was not much to the taste of the average Athenian,—above all,
digging[180]. ‘I cannot dig’ was proverbial. On the other hand there were
farm-duties in the performance of which sufficient care and intelligence
could only be exacted through the medium of wage-paying. Such was that
of olive-pickers, to whom and their wage we have a reference[181] in
the _Wasps_. They are probably free persons, but it is possible that
wage-earning slaves, paying rent to their owners, might be thus employed.
That in some occupations free and slave-labour were both employed
indifferently, is certain. The carriage of burdens[182] is a case in
point. But employment in odd jobs would be far more frequent in the city,
including Peiraeus, than in country places. I do not think it rash to
conclude that hired free labourers were few on the farms of Attica in the
time of Aristophanes.

Turning to citizen agriculturists, it must be mentioned that views
differ as to the proportion of large estates held and worked by wealthy
owners in this period. Such estates would almost certainly employ
slave-labour. So far as the evidence of Aristophanes goes, I should
infer that they were few. No doubt he had reasons for not making much of
such cases; still I believe that the comfortable working farmer, homely
and independent, the poet’s favourite character, was in fact the normal
type. They were not paupers,—far from it: but their capital consisted in
land, buildings, dead and live farm-stock, and the unexhausted value of
previous cultivation. These items could not suddenly be converted into
money without ruinous loss: most of them could not be carried away in the
flight to Athens. Hence the dislike felt by such men to an adventurous
policy, in which their interests were sacrificed. The passages in
which agriculture is connected[183] with large property occur in a play
produced 392 BC, at which time great changes had happened. It is highly
probable that, among these changes, much Attic land had passed from the
hands of ruined yeomen into those of rich men possessed of ready money
and able to buy in a glutted market. In a later period we shall find
γεωργεῖν used in the sense of acting the country landowner. To illustrate
the life and ways of the peasant farmers of this period Aristophanes
supplies endless references descriptive and allusive. The chief of these
have been cited above. A few more may be added here. In the _Clouds_
Strepsiades, urging his son to a rustic life, hopes to see him dressed in
a leathern jerkin, like his father before him, driving in the goats[184]
from the waste (φελλέως, the rocky hill-pasture). Here is a good instance
of husbandry in the Attic highlands, in short a case of crofters. What
a refugee might hope to save in his flight and take back to his farm on
the return of peace—it amounts to a few implements[185]—is set out in the
_Peace_. Loss of oxen, a yoke of two, driven off by Boeotian raiders, is
pitifully bewailed[186] by a farmer in the _Acharnians_. But in general
the farmers of the earlier plays are represented as tough elderly men.
They are the ‘elder generation,’ and the poet genuinely admires them. For
the younger generation he has a profound contempt. Evidently he thought
that the soundest breed of Athenian citizens was dying out; and I am not
sure that he was wrong.

I conclude that the evidence of Aristophanes on the whole points to an
agriculture mainly carried on by working farmers with the help of slaves.
This system was subjected to a very severe strain by the war-conditions
prevailing for many years, and I do not think that it was possible to
revive it on the same footing as before, even when Attica was no longer
exposed to frequent raids. It was not merely the loss of fixed capital
that told on the farmer class. Importation of corn was so developed
and organized to meet the necessities of the crowded city, that it
completely dominated the market, and in the production of cereals the
home agriculture could now no longer compete with foreign harvests.
There remained the culture of the olive and vine: but it needed years
to restore plantations of these and other fruit-trees, and to wait for
revival needed a capital possessed by few. The loss of imperial revenues
impoverished Athens, and the struggle with financial difficulties runs
through all her later history. It did not take the poorer citizens long
to see that how to get daily bread was the coming problem. State-pay was
no longer plentiful, and one aim of jealous franchise-regulations was
to keep down the number of claimants. Had Aristophanes any inkling of
the evil days to come? At all events he was aware that poverty works in
two[187] ways: if it leads one man to practise a trade for his living, it
tempts another to evildoing, perhaps to crime.


XI. THUCYDIDES.

=Thucydides= is a writer from whom it is extremely difficult to extract
any evidence on the subject of agricultural labour. The preeminent
importance of the problem of food-supply in the Greece of his day may be
amply illustrated from his work; but mainly in casual utterances, the
full significance of which is only to be gathered by thorough examination
such as has been made[188] by Dr Grundy. The economic revolution in
Attica that followed the reforms of Solon, the extended culture of the
vine and olive, the reduced growth of cereal crops, the development of
manufactures and sea-borne trade, the growing dependence on imported
corn, and the influence of these changes on the public policy of Athens,
are now seen more clearly as a whole than ever before. But to the great
historian these things were part of the background of his picture.
They are parts of a movement taken for granted rather than understood.
And the same is true of the existence and application of slave-labour.
In the time of Thucydides slavery was an economic and social fact,
unchallenged. It may be that it affected unfavourably the position of the
free handworker in the long run, and gave opportunities to slaveowning
capitalists. But this effect came about slowly, and freeman and slave
could and did labour[189] side by side, for instance in the great public
works promoted by Pericles. How far slave-labour was really cheaper
than free is a question beyond my subject. But it is important to note
the attitude of the poor citizen towards the question of what we call
a living wage. Once the great outlay on public works began to fall
off, and industries on a larger scale to compete with the individual
craftsman, how was the poor citizen to live? Directly or indirectly, the
profits of empire supplied the answer. Now it was obvious that the fewer
the beneficiaries the larger would be the average dividend of each. So
the policy favoured by the poorer classes was a jealous restriction of
the franchise. It was not the slave as labour-competitor against whom
protection was desired, but the resident freeman of doubtful origin as a
potential profit-sharer.

During nearly the whole of the period covered by the history of
Thucydides the public policy of Athens was controlled by urban
influences. Even before the rustic citizens were cooped up in the city,
it was no doubt city residents that formed the normal majority in the
Assembly, and to whom most of the paid offices and functions fell.
Even allowing for the recent growth of ‘seafaring rabble’ in Peiraeus,
these Athenians were not at all a mere necessitous mob. But it must
be remembered that the commercial and industrial capitalists were
interested in foreign trade. As Mr Cornford[190] points out, even metics
of this class must have had considerable influence owing to wealth and
connexions. Thus the urban rich as well as the urban poor were tempted
to favour a policy of adventure, contrary to the wishes and interests of
the Attic farmers. Now these latter were the truest representatives of
the old Attic stock. Once they were crowded into the city and many of
them diverted to state service, any sobering influence that they might
at first exercise would become less and less marked, and they would tend
to be lost in the mass. Therefore we hear only of the rustic life[191]
from which they unwillingly tore themselves in 431 BC: we do not get
any detailed picture of it, for the historian’s attention was otherwise
occupied. In the passage[192] accounting for the unpopularity of Pericles
in 430 BC we read that the Demos was irritated because ‘having less (than
the rich) to start with, it had been deprived of that little,’ while
the upper class (δυνατοὶ) had lost their fine establishments. Here the
context seems to imply that the δῆμος referred to is especially the small
farmers, still dwelling on their losses and not yet otherwise employed.

One passage is so important that it must be discussed by itself. Pericles
is made to encourage[193] the Athenians in resistance to the Spartan
demands by pointing out the superiority of their resources compared with
those of the enemy. ‘The Peloponnesians’ he says ‘are working farmers
(αὐτουργοί). They have no store of wealth (χρήματα) either private or
public. Nor have they experience of protracted warfare with operations
beyond the sea: for their own campaigns against each other are short,
owing to poverty.’ After explaining how they must be hampered by lack
of means, he resumes thus ‘And working farmers are more ready to do
service in person than by payment. They trust that they may have the
luck to survive the perils of war; but they have no assurance that their
means will not be exhausted before it ends: for it may drag out to an
unexpected length—and this is likely to happen.’ Two questions at once
suggest themselves. Is this a fair sketch of agricultural conditions in
Peloponnese? Does it imply that Attic farmers were not αὐτουργοί? To take
the latter first, it is held by Professor Beloch[194] that the passage
characterizes the Peloponnese as a land of free labour, in contrast with
slave-holding Athens. To this view I cannot assent. I am convinced that
the Attic farmer who worked with his own hands did often, if not always,
employ slave-labour also. He would not have a large gang of slaves, like
the large-scale cultivator: he could not afford to keep an overseer.
But it might pay him to keep one or two slaves, not more than he could
oversee himself. If the contrast be clearly limited, so as to compare
the wealth of Athens, now largely industrial and commercial, with the
wealth of a purely agricultural population, scattered over a wide area,
and having little ready money, it is reasonable and true. But this does
not raise the question of the Attic farmer at all. A little below[195]
Pericles is made to urge that class to submit quietly to invasion and
serious loss. They are not the people on whose resources he relies to
wear out the enemy. That enemy finds it hard to combine for common
action or to raise money by war-taxes. Athens is a compact community,
able to act quickly, and has at disposal the forces and tribute of her
subjects, secured by naval supremacy. To the other question, that of
Peloponnesian agriculture, I see no simple answer. All the southern
parts, the region of Spartan helotry, can hardly be called a land of
free labour in any rational sense. Nor does it appear that Argolis, in
spite of the various revolutions in local politics, could rightly be
described thus. Elis and Achaia were hardly of sufficient importance
to justify such a general description, even if it were certain that it
would apply to them locally. Arcadia, mostly mountainous and backward,
is the district to which the description would be most applicable. But
that there were slaves in Arcadia is not only probable but attested by
evidence, later in date but referring to an established[196] state of
things. At festivals, we are told, slaves and masters shared the same
table. This does not exclude rustic slaves: it rather seems to suggest
them. The working farmer entertaining his slaves on a rural holiday is
even a conventional tradition of ancient country life. Arcadia, a land of
peasant farmers, where a living had to be won by hard work, a land whence
already in the fifth century (and still more in the fourth) came numbers
of mercenary soldiers, a land whence Sparta raised no small part of her
‘Peloponnesian’ armies, is what Pericles has chiefly in mind. And that
Arcadians were normally αὐτουργοὶ did not imply that they had no slaves.

So far as Attica is concerned, Thucydides himself incidentally attests
the presence of rustic slaves. He would probably have been, surprised to
hear such an obvious fact questioned. In refusing to repeal the ‘Megarian
decree’ the Athenians charged[197] the Megarians with various offences,
one of which was the reception of their runaway slaves. In the winter
415-4 BC Alcibiades, urging the Spartans to occupy Deceleia, is made to
state[198] the advantages of that move thus ‘For of all the farm-stock
in the country the bulk will at once come into your possession, some by
capture, and the rest of its own accord (αὐτόματα).’ I take the last
words to refer especially to slaves,—rustic slaves. In recording the
success of the plan, the historian tells[199] us that more than 20000
slaves, a large part of whom were artisans (χειροτέχναι), deserted to the
enemy. We may guess that many or most of the artisan slaves had escaped
from Athens. Their loss would be felt in the reduction of manufacturing
output, so far as such enterprise was still possible at the time, and
perhaps in the dockyards. But the rest would be rustic slaves, many of
them (to judge by the map) from a district[200] in which there were
probably many small farms. On the other hand, the slaves welcomed by
the Megarians were probably from larger estates in the Thriasian plain.
Turning from Attica, we find references to rustic slaves[201] in Corcyra
(427 BC) and Chios (412 BC), where they were numerous and important
in their effect on operations. And in other passages where the slaves
belonging to the people of this or that place are mentioned we are not
to assume that only urban slaves are meant. For to live in a town, and
go out for the day’s work on the land, was and is a common usage in
Mediterranean countries. An extreme case[202] is where people live on an
island and cross water to cultivate farms elsewhere. It is perhaps hardly
necessary to remark that rich slaveowners, who could afford overseers,
did not need to reside permanently on their estates. Such a man might
have more than one farm, and in more than one district, not necessarily
in Attica at all, as Thucydides himself exploited a mining concession in
Thrace. In any case a well-equipped ‘country place’ was a luxury, and
is characterized as such[203] in words put into the mouth of Pericles,
who as the democratic statesman was concerned to stifle discontent by
insinuating that it was a mere expression of the selfishness of the rich.

The settlement of Athenians in colonies (ἀποικίαι) or on allotments
of conquered land (κληρουχίαι), in the islands or on the seaboard has
been fully treated[204] by Dr Grundy. He shews that this movement had
two aims, the occupation of strategic points as an imperial measure
of security, and the provision of land-lots for poorer citizens as a
measure of economic relief. The latter purpose is part of a general plan
for reducing the financial liabilities of the state with respect to its
citizen population, the necessity for which Dr Grundy explains. By these
settlements abroad some surplus population was removed and provided with
means of livelihood. If the assumption of a surplus citizen population
be sound (and I am not in a position to challenge it), we must also
assume a certain degree of genuine land-hunger, at least more than the
Attic territory could satisfy. If there was such land-hunger, it is
perhaps not unreasonable to connect it with the survival of old Attic
traditions of country life. And it would seem that the settlers, cleruchs
or colonists, did as a rule[205] stay and live in their settlements.
They would probably work their lands on much the same general plan as
their brethren in Attica, and their labour-arrangements would be much
the same. But in 427 BC, when Pericles was dead and there was surely no
surplus population, at least of able-bodied men, owing to the war, we
find a curious record. Reconquered Lesbos[206] had to be dealt with. It
was not subjected to an assessed tribute (φόρος), but parcelled into
3000 allotments, 2700 of which were reserved for 2700 Athenian citizens,
those who drew the lucky lots (τοὺς λαχόντας), and these 2700 were sent
out. But they did not stay[207] there. They let their shares to the old
inhabitants as cultivating tenants, at a rent of two minae per share
per annum, and evidently returned to Athens. By this arrangement a sum
of about £21000 a year would come in to the shareholders in Athens,
who would have a personal interest in seeing that it was punctually
paid. Whether these non-resident landlords were chosen by lot from all
citizens, rich or poor, is not stated. We know that in some cases[208]
at least the choice of settlers was confined to members of the two
lowest property-classes; and it may well be that on this occasion the
opportunity[209] was taken to compensate to some extent members of rural
families, who had suffered loss from the invasions of Attica, but did not
wish to go abroad. In any case their tenants would farm as they had done
before, employing or not employing slave labour according to their means
and the circumstances of the several farms. So too in cases of lands let
on lease, and in the confiscations and redistributions of lands, proposed
or carried out, it was simply their own profit and comfort that attracted
the lessees or beneficiaries. We are entitled to assume that if it paid
to employ slaves, and slaves were to be had, then slaves were employed.
In short, the scraps of evidence furnished by Thucydides leave us pretty
much where we were.


XII. XENOPHON.

=Xenophon=, who lived somewhere between 440 and 350 BC, introduces us
to a great change in the conditions of the Greek world. The uneasiness
and sufferings of the Greek states from the fall of Athens in 404 to the
time of exhaustion resulting from the battle of Mantinea in 362 do not
concern us here. Of such matters we hear much, but very little directly
of the economic changes that were undoubtedly going on. Poverty was as
before a standing trouble in Greece. In the more backward parts[210]
able-bodied men left their homes to serve as hired soldiers. The age of
professional mercenaries was in full swing. Arcadians Achaeans Aetolians
Acarnanians Thessalians and other seekers after fortune became more
and more the staple material of armies. Athens could no longer support
imperial ambitions on imperial tributes, and had to depend on the sale
of her products to procure her supplies of food. These products were
chiefly oil and wine and urban manufactures, and there is reason to think
that in general the most economical method of production was by slave
labour under close and skilful superintendence. Slaves were supplied
by kidnappers from the Euxine and elsewhere, but prisoners captured
by armies were another source of supply. This living loot was one of
the perquisites that made military life attractive, and the captives
found their way to such markets as the industrial centres of Athens and
Corinth. What happened in the rural districts of Attica, how far there
was a revival of the small farmer class, is a point on which we are very
much in the dark. The indirect evidence of Xenophon is interesting but
not wholly conclusive.

It is perhaps important to consider what significance should be attached
to the mention of agricultural work done by men of military forces on
land or sea. In 406 BC we hear of hardships[211] endured by the force
under the Spartan Eteonicus who were cut off in Chios after the defeat
of Arginusae. During the summer months they ‘supported themselves on
the fruits of the season and by working for hire in the country.’ This
is meant to shew that they were in sad straits, as the sequel clearly
proves. Again, in 372 BC Iphicrates was with a force in Corcyra, and
naval operations were for the time over. So he ‘managed[212] to provide
for his oarsmen (νάυτας) chiefly by employing them in farm-work for the
Corcyraeans,’ while he undertook an expedition on the mainland with his
soldiers. In both these cases want of pay was no doubt one reason for
emergency-labour. In the earlier case the destitution of the men led
them to look for any paid work: in the second the general had to do his
best in spite of irregular and insufficient supplies from home. In both
cases it is the exceptional nature of the arrangement that makes it worth
mentioning. It can hardly be viewed as having any economic significance.
But it is of some interest in connexion with a passage of Aristotle[213]
that will require notice below.

In the _Anabasis_ Xenophon reports his own arguments, urging the Greek
army to fight their way out of the Persian empire. He feared that,
now Cyrus was dead, and they were cut off far from home in an enemy’s
country, they might in despair surrender to the King and take service
under him. At best this meant giving up Greece and settling in Persia on
the King’s terms. This he begged them not to do: that they could under
Greek discipline cut their way out was evident from the independence
of many peoples of Asia Minor, who lived and raided as they chose in
defiance of the Persian power. He added ‘Therefore I hold[214] that our
right and proper course is first to make a push to reach Hellas and our
own kinsmen, and to demonstrate to the Greeks that their poverty is
their own fault: for, if they would only convey to these parts those of
their citizens who are now living in want at home, they could see them
in plenty (πλουσίους).’ But he reminds them that the good things of Asia
are only to be had as the reward of victory. For my present purpose
the one important point is that a mixed host of Greek mercenaries are
said to have been appealed to by a reference to the fact of poverty and
land-hunger among their folks at home, and that this reference is said
to have been made by an Athenian. Writing this in later life, Xenophon
would hardly have set down such an argument had it not then, as on the
occasion recorded, had considerable force. In another passage[215] he
gives an interesting account of the motives that had induced most of the
men to join the expedition. He is explaining why they were irritated at
a rumour that they were to be pressed to settle down at a spot on the
Euxine coast. ‘It was not lack of subsistence that had led most of the
soldiers to go abroad on this paid service: they had been told of the
generosity of Cyrus. Some had other men following them, some had even
spent money for the cause: others had run away from their parents, or
left children behind, meaning to win money and return to them, on the
faith of the reported prosperity of those already in the service of
Cyrus. Such was the character of the men, and they were longing to get
safe home to Greece.’ In short, full-blooded men were not content to
drag on poor ill-found stagnant lives in corners of Greece. And we may
add that nothing stimulated the enterprises of Greek adventurers in the
East, and led up to the conquests of Alexander, more effectually than the
experiences of the Ten Thousand.

Among these experiences was of course the capture of booty, more
particularly[216] in the form of marketable prisoners. So many of these
were sometimes in hand that they were a drag on the march: in a moment
of peril[217] they had to be abandoned. Even so, a considerable sum had
been raised by sales[218] and was shared out at Cerasus. The Greek cities
on the Pontic seaboard would all no doubt be resorts of slave-dealers.
One of the Ten Thousand himself, formerly a slave[219] at Athens,
recognized as kinsmen by their speech the people of a mountain tribe in
Armenia. In Thrace too we hear of the chieftain Seuthes, when short of
cash, offering[220] to make a payment partly in slaves. Nor was selling
into slavery a fate reserved for barbarians alone. Greeks[221] had been
treated thus in the great war lately ended; and now the Spartan harmost,
anxious to clear the remainder of the Ten Thousand[222] out of Byzantium
safely, made them an offer of facilities for a raid in Thrace: any that
stayed behind in the town were to be sold as slaves. And more than 400
were accordingly sold. It seems reasonable to infer that at this time the
slave-markets were as busy as ever, perhaps more so than had been the
case during the great war. It may be going too far to say that in some
parts of Greece people were now trying to restore a broken prosperity by
industrial exploitation of slave-labour, while from other parts soldiers
of fortune and kidnappers went forth to enlarge the supply of slaves.
But that there is some truth in such a statement I do not doubt. It was
evidently no easy matter for persons of small means to live in any sort
of comfort at Athens. We hear of Socrates[223] discussing with a friend
the embarrassments of a genteel household. The late civil disorders have
driven a number of this man’s sisters cousins and aunts to take refuge in
his house. In the present state of things neither land nor house property
are bringing in anything, and nobody will lend. How is he to maintain
a party of 14 free persons in all? Socrates points to the case of a
neighbour who provides for a still larger household without difficulty.
Questions elicit the fact that this household consists of slave-artisans
trained to useful trades. The distressed party have been brought up as
ladies, to do nothing. Socrates suggests that they had better work for
bread than starve. The adoption of this suggestion produced the happiest
results in every way. Such was the way in which Socrates led his friend.
He drew from him the assertion that free people are superior to slaves,
and so brought him round to the conviction that superiority could not be
shewn by mere incapacity for work.

In this conversation of Socrates may be detected the germ of a complete
revolution in thought on labour-subjects. It avoids the topic of
common humanity. That the slave is a man and brother, only the victim
of misfortune, had been hinted by Euripides and was to become a theme
of comic poets. But Socrates lets this point alone, and argues from
natural economic necessity. Elsewhere he denounces[224] idleness and
proclaims that useful labour is good for the labourer, taking a moral
point of view. Again, he suggests[225] that the shortcomings of slaves
are largely due to their masters’ slackness or mismanagement. But he
accepts slavery as a social and economic fact. All the same he makes
play at times with the notion of moral worthlessness, which many people
regarded as characteristic of slaves in general. It is the knowledge of
the true qualities[226] of conduct, in short of the moral and political
virtues, that makes men honourable gentlemen (καλοὺς κἀγαθούς), and the
lack of this knowledge that makes them slavish (ἀνδραποδώδεις). But, if
the difference between a liberal and an illiberal training, expressed
in resulting habits of mind, is thus great, the slavish must surely
include many of those legally free. Hence he even goes so far as to
say ‘Therefore we ought to spare no exertions to escape being slaves
(ἀνδράποδα).’ And he lays stress on the need of moral qualities[227]
in slaves as well as freemen: we should never be willing to entrust
our cattle or our store-houses or the direction of our works to a
slave devoid of self-control. His position suggests two things: first,
that the importance of the slave in the economic and social system was
a striking fact now recognized: second, that the unavoidable moral
degradation generally assumed to accompany the condition of slavery
was either wrongfully assumed or largely due to the shortcomings of
masters. The conception of the slave as a mere chattel, injury to which
is simply a damage to its owner, was proving defective in practice,
and the philosopher was inclined to doubt its soundness in principle.
Xenophon had been brought into touch with such questionings by his
intercourse with Socrates. It remains to see how far he shews traces of
their influence when he comes to treat labour-problems in connexion with
agriculture.

References to agriculture[228] are few and unimportant in the
_Memorabilia_. The _Economicus_ deals directly with the subject. A
significant passage throws light on the condition of rural Attica at
the end of the fifth century BC. The speaker Ischomachus tells[229]
how his father made money by judicious enterprise. He bought up farms
that were let down or derelict, got them into good order, and sold
them at a profit when improved. Clearly he was a citizen, able to deal
in real estate, and a capitalist. There can hardly be a doubt that
he operated by the use of slave-labour on a considerable scale. All
through the _Economicus_ slavery is presupposed, but the attitude of
Xenophon is characteristically genial and humane. The existence of a
slave-market[230], where you may buy likely men, even skilled craftsmen,
is assumed. But the most notable feature of the book is the seriousness
with which the responsibility of the master[231] is asserted. There is
no querulous evasion of the issue by laying the blame of failure on the
incorrigible vices of slaves. Prosperity will depend on securing good
service: good service cannot be secured by any amount of chains and
punishments, if the master be slack and fitful: both in the house and
on the farm, good sympathetic discipline, fairly and steadily enforced,
is the secret of success. Carelessness malingering and desertion must
be prevented or checked. And to achieve this is the function of the
economic art, operating through the influence of hope rather than
fear. The training of slaves[232] is a matter needing infinite pains
on the part of the master and mistress. She must train her housekeeper
(ταμία) as he trains his steward (ἐπίτροπος), and both are to act in a
humane and kindly spirit. Yet the strictly animal view of slaves[233]
appears clearly in a passage where the training of slaves is compared
with that of horses or performing dogs. ‘But it is possible to make
men more obedient by mere instruction (καὶ λόγῳ), pointing out that it
is to their interest to obey: in dealing with slaves the system which
is thought suitable for training beasts has much to recommend it as a
way of teaching obedience. For by meeting their appetites with special
indulgence to their bellies you may contrive to get much out of them.’
We gather that the better and more refined type of Athenian gentleman
with a landed estate, while averse to inhumanity, and aware that slaves
were human, still regarded his slaves as mere chattels. His humanity is
prompted mainly by self-interest. As for rights, they have none.

The system of rewards and punishments on the estate of course rests
wholly on the masters will. The whole success of the working depends on
the efficiency of the steward or stewards. Accordingly the passage in
which Ischomachus explains how he deals with these trusted slaves is
of particular interest. Having carefully trained a man, he must judge
him[234] according to a definite standard—does he or does he not honestly
and zealously discharge his trust? ‘When I find that in spite of good
treatment they still try to cheat me, I conclude that their greediness
is past curing, and degrade them[235] from their charge.’ This seems to
mean that they are reduced to the position of the ordinary hands. ‘But
when I observe any induced to be honest[236] not merely because honesty
pays best, but because they want to get a word of praise from me, these I
treat as no longer slaves (ὥσπερ ἐλευθέροις ἤδη). I not only enrich them,
but shew them respect as men of honour.’ One is tempted to interpret
these last words as implying that actual manumission takes place, the
services of the men being retained as freedmen. But the words do not say
so plainly, and it is safer to read into them no technical sense. That
the men are trusted and allowed to earn for themselves, is enough. The
agriculture depicted in the _Economicus_ is that of a landowner with
plenty of capital, not that of the peasant farmer. The note of it is
superintendence[237] (ἐπιμέλεια), not bodily labour (αὐτουργία). In one
place αὐτουργία is mentioned, when agriculture is praised, one of its
merits being the bodily strength that those gain who work with their own
hands. It is as well to repeat here that the fact of a farmer labouring
himself does not prove that he employs no other labour. On the other
hand there is good reason to infer that the other class, those who ‘do
their farming by superintendence,’ are not manual labourers at all. The
benefit to them is that agriculture ‘makes them early risers and smart in
their movements.’ The master keeps a horse, and is thus enabled to ride
out[238] early to the farm and stay there till late.

It is remarkable that in this book we hear nothing of hired labourers.
There are two references[239] to the earning of pay, neither of them in
connexion with agricultural labour. Yet the existence of a class of poor
people who have to earn their daily bread[240] is not ignored. Socrates
admires the economic skill[241] of Ischomachus. It has enabled him to be
of service to his friends and to the state. This is a fine thing, and
shews the man of substance. In contrast, ‘there are numbers of men who
cannot live without depending on others: numbers too who are content
if they can procure themselves the necessaries of life.’ The solid
and strong men are those who contrive to make a surplus and use it as
benefactors. I read this passage as indirect evidence of the depression
of small-scale free industry and the increase of slaveowning capitalism
in the Athens of Xenophon’s time. And I find another indication[242]
of this in connexion with agriculture. In the course of the dialogue
it appears that the chief points of agricultural knowledge are simple
enough: Socrates knew them all along. Why then do some farmers succeed
and others fail? The truth of the matter is, replies Ischomachus, that
the cause of failure is not want of knowledge but want of careful
superintendence. This criticism is in general terms, but it is surely
inapplicable to the case of the working peasant farmer: he who puts
his own labour into the land will not overlook the shortcomings of a
hired man or a slave. In the agriculture of which this book treats it
is the practical and intelligent self-interest of the master that rules
everything. His appearance on the field[243] should cause all the slaves
to brighten up and work with a will: but rather to win his favour than to
escape his wrath. For in agriculture, as in other pursuits, the ultimate
secret of success[244] is a divine gift, the power of inspiring a willing
obedience.

I have kept back one passage which needs to be considered with reference
to the steward[245]. Can we safely assume that an ἐπίτροπος was always,
or at least normally, a slave? Of those who direct the labourers, the
real treasure is the man who gets zealous and steady work out of the
hands, whether he be steward or director (ἐπίτροπος or ἐπιστάτης).
What difference is connoted by these terms? In the _Memorabilia_[246],
Socrates meets an old friend who is impoverished by the results of the
great war, and driven to earn his living by bodily labour. Socrates
points out to him that this resource will fail with advancing age: he had
better find some employment less dependent on bodily vigour. ‘Why not
look out for some wealthy man who needs an assistant in superintendence
of his property? Such a man would find it worth his while to employ you
as director (or foreman, ἔργων ἐπιστατοῦντα), to help in getting in his
crops and looking after his estate.’ He answers ‘it would gall me to put
up with a servile position (δουλείαν).’ Clearly the position of ἐπιστάτης
appears to him a meaner occupation than free wage-earning by manual
labour. In another place[247] we hear of an ἐπιστάτης for a mine-gang
being bought for a talent (£235). That superintendents, whatever their
title, were at least normally slaves, seems certain. As to the difference
between ‘steward’ and ‘director’ I can only guess that the former might
be a slave promoted from the ranks, but might also be what the ‘director’
always was, a new importation. It seems a fair assumption that, as a
free superintendent must have been a new importation, a specially bought
slave ‘director’ would rank somewhat higher than an ordinary ‘steward,’
whose title ἐπίτροπος at once marked him as a slave. In relation to the
general employment of slave-labour there is practically no difference:
both are slave-driving ‘overseers.’ As the pamphlet on the Revenues has
been thought by some critics not to be the work of Xenophon, I pass
it by, only noting that it surely belongs to the same generation. It
fully attests the tendency to rely[248] on slave-labour, but it is not
concerned with agriculture.

The romance known as _Cyropaedia_ wanders far from fact. Its purpose is
to expound or suggest Xenophon’s own views on the government of men:
accordingly opportunities for drawing a moral are sought at the expense
of historical truth. But from my present point of view the chief point
to note is that it does not touch the labour-question with which we
are concerned. True, we hear[249] of αὐτουργοί, and of the hardship
and poverty of such cultivators, gaining a painful livelihood from an
unkind soil. That the value of a territory depends on the presence of
a population[250] able and willing to develop its resources, is fully
insisted on by Cyrus. But this is in connexion with conquest. The
inhabitants of a conquered district remain as tributary cultivators,
merely changing their rulers. That the labour of the conquered is
to provide the sustenance of the conquering race, is accepted as a
fundamental principle. It is simply the right of the stronger: if he
leaves anything to his subject, that is a voluntary act of grace. The
reason why we hear little of slavery is that all are virtually slaves
save the one autocrat. The fabric of Xenophon’s model government is
a very simple one: first, an oriental Great King, possessed of all
the virtues: second, a class of warrior nobles, specially trained and
dependent on the King’s favour: third, a numerous subject population,
whose labour supports the whole, and who are practically serfs. A cynical
passage[251] describes the policy of Cyrus, meant to perpetuate the
difference of the classes. After detailing minutely the liberal training
enjoined on those whom he intended to employ in governing (οὓς ... ἄρχειν
ᾤετο χρῆναι), Xenophon proceeds to those whom he intended to qualify
for servitude (οὓς ... κατεσκεύαζεν εἰς τὸ δουλεύειν). These it was his
practice not to urge to any of the liberal exercises, nor to allow them
to possess arms. He took great care to spare them any privations: for
instance at a hunt: the hunters had to take their chance of hunger and
thirst, being freemen, but the beaters had ample supplies and halted
for meals. They were delighted with this consideration, the design of
which was to prevent their ever ceasing to be slaves (ἀνδράποδα). The
whole scheme is frankly imperial. All initiative and power rests with
the autocrat, and all depends on his virtues. That a succession of
such faultless despots could not be ensured, and that the scheme was
consequently utopian, did not trouble the simple Xenophon. Like many
other thoughtful men of the time, he was impressed by the apparent
efficiency of the rigid Spartan system, and distrusted the individual
liberty enjoyed in democratic states, above all in Athens. In Persia,
though he thought the Persians were no longer what Cyrus the Great had
made them, he had seen how great was still the power arising from the
control of all resources by a single will. These two impressions combined
seem to account for the tone of the _Cyropaedia_, and the servile
position of the cultivators explains why it has so very little bearing on
the labour-question in agriculture.


XIII. THE COMIC FRAGMENTS.

In pursuing our subject from period to period, and keeping so far as
possible to chronological order, it may seem inconsistent to take this
collection[252] of scraps as a group. For Attic Comedy covers nearly
two centuries, from the age of Cratinus to the age of Menander. Many
changes happened in this time, and the evidence of the fragments must not
be cited as though it were that of a single witness. But the relevant
passages are few; for the writers, such as Athenaeus and Stobaeus,
in whose works most of the extracts are preserved, seldom had their
attention fixed on agriculture. The longer fragments[253] of Menander
recently discovered are somewhat more helpful. The adaptations of Plautus
and Terence must be dealt with separately.

That country life and pursuits had their share of notice on the comic
stage is indicated by the fact that Aristophanes produced a play[254]
named Γεωργοί, and Menander a Γεωργός. That the slave-market was active
is attested by references in all periods. So too is wage-earning
labour of various kinds: but some of these passages certainly refer to
wage-earning by slaves paying a rent (ἀποφορά) to their owners. Also
the problems arising out of the relation between master and slave, with
recognition of the necessity of wise management. The difference between
the man who does know how to control slaves[255] and the man who does not
(εὔδουλος and κακόδουλος) was early expressed, and indirectly alluded to
throughout. The good and bad side of slaves, loyalty treachery honesty
cheating etc, is a topic constantly handled. But these passages nearly
always have in view the close relation of domestic slavery. I think we
are justified in inferring that the general tone steadily becomes more
humane. Common humanity gains recognition as a guide of conduct. Many of
the fragments have been handed down as being neatly put moral sentences,
and of these not a few[256] recognize the debt that a slave owes to a
good master. These are utterances of slaves, for the slave as a character
became more and more a regular figure of comedy, as comedy became more
and more a drama of private life. Side by side with this tone is the
frank recognition of the part played by chance[257] in the destinies of
master and slave; a very natural reflexion in a state of things under
which you had but to be captured and sold out of your own country, out
of the protection of your own laws, to pass from the former condition to
the latter. A few references to manumission also occur, and the Roman
adaptations suggest that in the later Comedy they were frequent. On
the other hand several fragments seem to imply that circumstances were
working unfavourably to the individual free craftsmen, at least in some
trades. The wisdom of learning a craft (τέχνη), as a resource[258] that
cannot be lost like external possessions, is insisted on. But in other
passages a more despairing view[259] appears; death is better than the
painful struggle for life. No doubt different characters were made to
speak from different points of view.

It is to be noted that two fragments of the earlier Comedy refer to the
old tradition[260] of a golden age long past, in which there were no
slaves (see under Herodotus), and in which the bounty of nature[261]
provided an ample supply of food and all good things (see the passages
cited from the _Odyssey_). Athenaeus, who has preserved[262] these
extracts, remarks that the old poets were seeking by their descriptions
to accustom mankind to do their own work with their own hands (αὐτουργοὺς
εἶναι). But it is evident that the subject was treated in the broadest
comic spirit, as his numerous quotations shew. When in the restoration
of good old times the articles of food are to cook and serve themselves
and ask to be eaten, we must not take the picture very seriously. These
passages do however suggest that there was a food-question at the time
when they were written, of sufficient importance to give point to them:
possibly also a labour-question. Now Crates and Pherecrates flourished
before the Peloponnesian war and during its earlier years, Nicophon
was a late contemporary of Aristophanes. The evidence is too slight to
justify a far-reaching conclusion, but it is consistent with the general
inferences drawn from other authorities. In the fragments of the later
Comedy we begin to find passages bearing on agriculture, and it is
surely a mere accident that we do not have them in those of the earlier.

The contrast between life in town and life in the country is forcibly
brought out[263] by Menander. The poor man has no chance in town, where
he is despised and wronged: in the country he is spared the galling
presence of witnesses, and can bear his ill fortune on a lonely farm.
The farm then is represented as a sort of refuge from unsatisfactory
surroundings in the city. When we remember that in Menander’s time Athens
was a dependency of one or other of Alexander’s Successors, a community
of servile rich and mean poor, fawning on its patrons and enjoying no
real freedom of state-action, we need not wonder at the poet’s putting
such a view into the mouths of some of his characters. The remains of
the play Γεωργὸς are of particular interest. The old master is a tough
obstinate old fellow, who persists in working[264] on the land himself,
and even wounds himself by clumsy use of his mattock. But he has a staff
of slaves, barbarians, on whom he is dependent. These paid no attention
to the old man in his misfortune; a touch from which we may infer that
the relations between master and slaves were not sympathetic. But a young
free labourer in his employ comes to the rescue, nurses him, and sets
him on his legs again. While laid up, the old man learns by inquiry that
this youth is his own son, the fruit of a former amour, whom his mother
has reared in struggling poverty. Enough of the play remains to shew that
the trials of the free poor were placed in a strong light, and that, as
pointed out above, the struggle for existence in the city was felt to
be especially severe. In this case whether the old man is rich or not
does not appear: at all events he has enough property to make amends for
his youthful indiscretions by relieving the necessities of those who
have a claim on him. He is probably the character in whose mouth[265]
were put the words ‘I am a rustic (ἄγροικος); that I don’t deny; and not
fully expert in affairs of city life (lawsuits etc?): but I was not born
yesterday.’

The functions of the rustic slaves may give us some notion of the kind
of farms that Menander had in mind. In the Γεωργός, the slave Davus,
coming in from his day’s labour, grumbles[266] at the land on which he
has to work: shrubs and flowers of use only for festival decorations grow
there as vigorous weeds, but when you sow seed you get back what you
sowed with no increase. This savours of the disappointing tillage of an
upland farm. In the Ἐπιτρέποντες[267], Davus is a shepherd, Syriscus a
charcoal-burner, occupations also proper to the hill districts. We must
not venture to infer that Attic agriculture was mainly of this type in
the poet’s day. The favourite motive of plots in the later Comedy, the
exposure of infants in remote spots, their rescue by casual herdsmen
or other slaves, and their eventual identification as the very person
wanted in each case to make all end happily, would of itself suggest
that lonely hill-farms, rather than big estates in the fat lowland,
should be the scene. From my point of view the fact of chief interest
is that slave-labour appears as normal in such an establishment. Rustic
clothing[268] and food served out in rations[269] are minor details
of the picture, and the arrangement by which a slave can work as
wage-earner[270] for another employer, paying over a share to his own
master (the ἀποφορά), surely indicates that there was nothing exceptional
about it. There are one or two other fragments directly bearing on
agricultural labour. One of uncertain age[271] speaks of a tiresome
hand who annoys his employer by chattering about some public news from
the city, when he should be digging. I doubt whether a slave is meant:
at least he is surely a hired one, but why not a poor freeman, reduced
to wage-earning? Such is the position of Timon[272] in Lucian—μισθοῦ
γεωργεῖ—a passage in which adaptations from Comedy are reasonably
suspected. That rustic labour has a better side to it, that ‘the bitter
of agriculture has a touch of sweet in it,’ is admitted[273] by one of
Menander’s characters, but the passage which seems the most genuine
expression of the prevalent opinion[274] is that in which we read that a
man’s true part is to excel in war, ‘for agriculture is a bondman’s task’
(τὸ γὰρ γεωργεῖν ἔργον ἐστὶν οἰκέτου).

The nature and condition of the evidence must be my excuse for the
unsatisfactory appearance of this section. The number of passages bearing
on slavery in general, and the social and moral questions connected
therewith, is large and remote from my subject. They are of great
interest as illustrating the movement of thought on these matters, but
their bearing on agricultural labour is very slight. To the virtues of
agriculture as a pursuit tending to promote a sound and manly character
Menander[275] bears witness. ‘A farm is for all men a trainer in virtue
and a freeman’s life.’ Many a town-bred man has thought and said the
same, but praise is not always followed by imitation. Even more striking
is another[276] remark, ‘farms that yield but a poor living make brave
men.’ For it was the hard-living rustics from the back-country parts
of Greece that succeeded as soldiers of fortune, the famous Greek
mercenaries whose services all contemporary kings were eager to secure.
In short, to the onlooker it seemed a fine thing to be bred a healthy
rustic, but the rustic himself was apt to prefer a less monotonous and
more remunerative career.


XIV. EARLY LAWGIVERS AND THEORISTS.

The treatises of the two great philosophers on the state (and therefore
on the position of agriculture in the state) did not spring suddenly out
of nothing; nor was it solely the questionings of Socrates[277] that
turned the attention of Plato and Aristotle to the subject. Various
lawgivers had shewn in their systems a consciousness of its importance,
and speculative thinkers outside[278] the ranks of practical statesmen
had designed model constitutions in which a reformed land-system
played a necessary part. It is to Aristotle, the great collector of
experience, that we owe nearly all our information of these attempts.
It is convenient to speak of them briefly together. All recognize much
the same difficulties, and there is a striking similarity in the means
by which they propose to overcome them. The lawgivers[279] referred to
are =Pheidon= of Corinth and =Philolaus=, also a Corinthian though his
laws were drafted for Thebes, and thirdly[280] =Solon=. The dates of
the first two are uncertain, but they belong to early times. The two
constitution-framers[281] are =Hippodamus= of Miletus, whose birth is
placed about 475 BC, and =Phaleas= of Chalcedon, probably somewhat later.
Both witnessed the growth of imperial Athens, and Phaleas at least is
thought to have been an elder contemporary of Plato. Very little is known
about them. If we say that the attempt to design ideal state systems
shews that they were not satisfied with those existing, and that the
failure of past legislation may have encouraged them to theorize, we have
said about all that we are entitled to infer.

On one point there was general agreement among Greek states: all desired
to be ‘free’ or independent of external control. For some special purpose
one people might for a time be recognized as the Leaders (ἡγεμόνες) of
a majority of states, or more permanently as Representatives or Patrons
(προστάται). But these unofficial titles only stood for a position
acquiesced in under pressure of necessity. Each community wanted to live
its own life in its own way, and the extreme jealousy of interference
remained. Side by side with this was an internal jealousy causing
serious friction in most of the several states, at first between nobles
and commons, later between rich and poor. The seditions (στάσεις) arising
therefrom were causes, not only of inner weakness and other evils, but
in particular of intervention from without Therefore it was often the
policy of the victors in party strife to expel or exterminate their
opponents, in order to secure to themselves undisputed control of their
own state. This tendency operated to perpetuate the smallness of scale
in Greek states, already favoured by the physical features of the land.
That the Greeks with all their cleverness never invented what we call
Representative Government is no wonder. Men’s views in general were
directed to the independence of their own state under control of their
own partisans. The smaller the state, the easier it was to organize the
control: independence could only be maintained by military efficiency,
and unanimous loyalty was something to set off against smallness of
numbers. Moreover the Greek mind had an artistic bent, and the sense of
proportion was more easily and visibly gratified on a smaller scale. The
bulk of Persia did not appear favourable to human freedom and dignity
as understood in Hellas. In the Persian empire there was nothing that
a Greek would recognize as citizenship. The citizen of a Greek state
expected to have some voice in his own government: the gulf between
citizen and non-citizen was the line of division, but even in Sparta the
full citizens were equals in legal status among themselves. We may fairly
say that the principle of equality (τὸ ἴσον) was at the root of Greek
notions of citizenship. Privilege did not become less odious as it ceased
to rest on ancestral nobility and became more obviously an advantage
claimed by wealth.

Since the light thrown on the subject[282] by Dr Grundy, no one will
dispute the importance of economic considerations in Greek policy, and in
particular of the ever-pressing question of the food-supply. The security
of the land and crops was to most states a vital need, and necessitated
constant readiness to maintain it in arms. Closely connected therewith
was the question of distribution. Real property was not only the oldest
and most permanent investment. Long before Aristotle[283] declared
that ‘the country is a public thing’ (κοινόν), that is an interest of
the community, that opinion was commonly held, whether formulated or
instinctive. The position of the landless man was traditionally a dubious
one. The general rule was that only a citizen could own land in the
territory of the state. From this it was no great step to argue that
every citizen ought to own a plot of land within the borders. This was
doubtless not always possible. In such a state as Corinth or Megara or
Miletus commercial growth in a narrow territory had led to extensive
colonization from those centres. And the normal procedure in the
foundation of Greek colonies was to divide the occupied territory into
lots (κλῆροι) and assign them severally to settlers. In course of time
the discontents generated by land-monopolizing in old Hellas were liable
to reappear beyond the seas, particularly in colonial states of rapid
growth: a notorious instance is found in the troubles arising at Syracuse
out of the squatter-sovranty created by the original colonists. We meet
with plans for confiscation and redistribution of land as a common
phenomenon of Greek revolutions. The mischievous moral effects of so
unsettling a process on political wellbeing did not escape the notice of
thoughtful observers. But on one important point we have practically no
evidence. Did the new allottees wish to be, and in fact normally become,
working farmers (αὐτουργοί)? Or did they aim at providing for themselves
an easy life, supported by the labour of slaves? I wish I could surely
and rightly decide between these alternatives. As it is, I can only say
that I believe the second to be nearer the truth.

Under such conditions Greek lawgivers and theorists alike seem to have
looked to much the same measures for remedying evils that they could not
ignore. The citizen as landholder is the human figure with which they
are all concerned. To prevent destitution arising from the loss[284] of
his land-lot is a prime object. Some therefore would forbid the sale of
the lot. To keep land in the same hands it was necessary to regulate
numbers of citizen households, and this was attempted[285] in the laws
of Pheidon. Families may die out, so rules to provide for perpetuity by
adoptions[286] were devised by Philolaus. Again, there is the question
of the size of the lots, and this raises the further question of a
limit to acquisition. Such a limitation is attributed[287] to certain
early lawgivers not named, and with them apparently to Solon. Phaleas
would insist on equality of landed estate[288] among his citizens: a
proposal which Aristotle treats as unpractical, referring to only one
form of wealth, and leaving out of account slaves, tame animals, coin,
and the dead-stock tools etc. His exclusive attention to internal civic
wellbeing is also blamed, for it is absurd to disregard the relations
of a state to other states: there must be a foreign policy, therefore
you must provide[289] military force. The fanciful scheme of Hippodamus,
a strange doctrinaire genius, seems to have been in many points
inconsistent from want of attention to practical detail. From Aristotle’s
account he appears not to have troubled himself with the question of
equal land-lots, but his fixing the number[290] of citizens (10,000) is
evidence that his point of view necessitated a limit. He proceeds on a
system of triads. The citizens are grouped in three classes, artisans
(τεχνῖται), husbandmen (γεωργοί), and the military, possessors of arms.
The land is either sacred (for service of religion, ἱερά), public
(δημοσία or κοινή) or the property of the husbandmen (ἰδία). The three
classes of land and citizens are to be assumed equal. The military are
to be supported by the produce of the public land. But who cultivates
it? Aristotle shews that the scheme is not fully thought out. If the
soldiers, then the distinction, obviously intended, between soldier and
farmer, is lost. If the farmers, then the distinction between the public
and private land is meaningless. If neither, a fourth class, not allowed
for in the plan, will be required. This last is probably what Hippodamus
meant: but to particularize the employment of slaves may have appeared
superfluous. Into the purely constitutional details I need not enter, but
one criticism is so frankly expressive of Greek ideas that it can hardly
be omitted. What, says Aristotle, is the use of political rights to the
artisans and husbandmen? they are unarmed, and therefore will practically
be slaves of the military class. This was the truth in Greek politics
generally, and is one of the most significant facts to be borne in mind
when considering the political failure of the Greeks.

A curious difference of economic view is shewn in the position assigned
to the artisan[291] or craftsman element by Hippodamus and Phaleas
respectively. Phaleas would have them state-slaves (δημόσιοι), Hippodamus
makes them citizens, though unarmed. On the former plan the state would
no doubt feed them and use their produce, as we do with machinery. Of
the latter plan Aristotle remarks that τεχνῖται are indispensable: all
states need them, and they can live of the earnings of their crafts, but
the γεωργοὶ as a distinct class are superfluous. We may reply that, if
the craftsmen live of their earnings and stick to their several crafts,
they will need to buy food, and the farmers are surely there to supply
it. The reply is so obvious that one feels as if Aristotle’s meaning had
been obscured through some mishap to the text. For the present purpose
it suffices that the professional craftsmen in these two Utopias are
to be either actual slaves or citizens _de iure_ who are _de facto_ as
helpless as slaves. In the scheme of Hippodamus the farmer-class also are
virtually the slaves of the military. Another notable point, apparently
neglected by Hippodamus, is the trust reposed in education[292] or
training by both Phaleas and his critic. How to implant in your citizens
the qualities needed for making your institutions work well in practice,
is the problem. Phaleas would give all the same training, on the
same principle as he gives equal land-lots. To Aristotle this seems
crude nonsense: the problem to him is the discovery of the appropriate
training, whether the same for all or not. This insistence on training as
the main thing in citizen-making is, as we shall see, a common feature
of Greek political speculation. But in the artistic desire to produce
the ‘complete citizen,’ and thereby make possible a model state, the
specializing mania outruns the humbler considerations of everyday human
society, and agriculture, for all its confessed importance, is apt to be
treated with something very like contempt. The tendency to regard farmer
and warrior as distinct classes is unmistakeable. The peasant-soldier of
Roman tradition is not an ordinary Greek figure. How far the small scale
of Greek states may have favoured this differentiation is very hard to
say. But Greek admiration for the athlete type had probably something to
do with the growth of military professionalism.

The recognition of a land-question and attempts to find a solution were
probably stimulated by observation of contemporary phenomena, especially
in the two leading states of the fifth century. Sparta had long held
the first place, and even the rise of Athens had not utterly destroyed
her ancient prestige. That her military system was effective, seemed
proved by the inviolability of Laconian territory and the successes of
her armies in external wars. That it was supported by the labour of a
Greek population reduced to serfdom, was perhaps a weak point in her
institutions; but that Greek opinion was seriously shocked by the fact
can hardly be maintained. It was now and then convenient to use it as
a passing reproach, but even Athens did not refuse to aid in putting
down Helot rebellions. And this weak point was set off by a strong one.
Whatever the reasons[293] for her policy, she interfered very little
in the internal affairs of her allies and did not tax them. To be
content with the leadership of confederates, and not to convert it into
an empire of subjects, assured to her a certain amount of respectful
sympathy in the jealous Greek world. Thus she afforded an object-lesson
in the advantages of rigid specialization. She provided her own food
in time of peace, and took her opponents’ food in time of war. The
disadvantages of her system were yet to appear. Athens on the other
hand was becoming more and more dependent on imported food. She was the
leader of the maritime states and islands: she had become their imperial
mistress. However easy her yoke might be in practice, it left no room
for independent action on the part of her subject allies: what had been
contributions from members of a league had become virtually imperial
taxation, and to Greek prejudices such taxation appeared tyranny. Nor was
this prejudice allowed to die out. The rival interests of commercial
Corinth saw to it that the enslavement, not of Greeks but of Greek
states, should be continually borne in mind. The contrast between the
two leading powers was striking. But, if many Greek states feared in
Athens a menace to their several independence, on the other hand they
shrank from copying the rigid discipline of Sparta. No wonder that some
of the more imaginative minds had dreams of a system more congenial to
Greek aspirations. But the land-question was a stumbling-block. That a
citizen should take an active personal share in politics was assumed, and
that he should do this tended to make him depute non-political duties to
others. Thus the notion that all citizens should be equal in the eye of
the law and share in government—democracy in short—was not favourable to
personal labour on the land. No distribution of land-lots could convert
the city politician into a real working farmer. Therefore either there
must be a decline in agriculture or an increase of slave-labour, or both.
From these alternatives there was no escape: but ingenious schemers long
strove to find a way. And from those days to these no one has succeeded
in constructing a sound and lasting civilization on a basis of slavery.


XV. PLATO.

An Athenian who died in 347 BC at the age of 80 or 82 years had witnessed
extraordinary changes in the Hellenic world, more particularly in the
position of Athens. With the political changes we are not here directly
concerned. But they were closely connected with economic changes, both as
cause and as effect. The loss of empire[294] entailed loss of revenue.
The amounts available as state-pay being reduced, the poorer citizens
lost a steady source of income: that their imperial pride had departed
did not tend to make them less sensitive to the pinch of poverty. Athens,
thrown back upon her own limited resources, had to produce what she could
in order to buy what she needed, and capital, employing slave-labour,
found its opportunity. In this atmosphere discontent and jealousy grew
fast: conflicting interests of rich and poor were at the back of all
the disputes of political life. Athens it is true avoided the crude
revolutionary methods adopted in some less civilized states. The Demos
did not massacre or banish the wealthy Few, and share out their lands
and other properties among the poor Many. But they consistently regarded
the estates of the rich as the source from which the public outlay
should as far as possible be drawn. They left the capitalist free to
make money in his own way, and squeezed him when he had made it. Whether
he were citizen or metic[295] mattered not from the economic point of
view. Capitalistic industry was really slave-industry. The ‘small man’
had the choice of either competing, perhaps vainly, with the ‘big man’
on the land or in the workshop, or of giving up the struggle and using
his political power to make the ‘big man’ disgorge some of his profits.
Moreover military life no longer offered the prospects of conquest and
gain that had made it attractive. The tendency was to treat the citizen
army as a defensive force, and to employ professional mercenaries (of
whom there was now[296] no lack) on foreign service. To a thoughtful
observer these phenomena suggested uneasy reflexions. Demos in Assembly
was a dispiriting spectacle. Selfish[297] and shortsighted, he cared
more for his own belly and his amusements than for permanent interests
of state. Perhaps this was no new story. But times had changed, and the
wealthy imperial Athens, able to support the burden of her own defects,
had passed away. Bad government in reduced circumstances might well be
productive of fatal results.

It was not Athens alone that had failed. Fifteen years before
Plato’s death the failure of both Sparta and Thebes had left Hellas
exhausted[298] and without a leading state to give some sort of unity
to Greek policy. There was still a common Hellenic feeling, but it was
weak compared with separatist jealousy. Antipathy to the Barbarian
remained: but the Persian power had been called in by Greeks to aid them
against other Greeks, and this was a serious danger to the Greek world.
Things were even worse in the West. How anarchic democracy had paved the
way for military tyranny at Syracuse, how the tyranny had lowered the
standard of Greek civilization in Sicily and Italy, and had been the
ruin of Greek cities, no man of that age knew better than Plato. Plato
was not singular in his distrust of democracy: that attitude was common
enough. Among the companions of Socrates I need only refer to Xenophon
and Critias. Socrates had insisted that government is a difficult art,
for success in which a thorough training is required. Now, whatever
might be the case in respect of tyrannies or oligarchies, democracy
was manifestly an assertion of the principle that all citizens were
alike qualified for a share in the work of government. Yet no craftsman
would dream of submitting the work of his own trade to the direction of
amateurs. Why then should the amateur element, led by amateurs, dominate
in the sphere of politics? It was easy to find instances of the evil
effects of amateurism in public affairs. It is true that this line of
argument contained a fallacy, as arguments from analogy very often
do. But it had a profound influence on Plato, and it underlay all his
political speculations. It was reinforced by an influence that affected
many of his contemporaries, admiration of Sparta on the score of the
permanence[299] of her system of government. That this admiration was
misguided, and the permanence more apparent than real, matters not: to a
Greek thinker it was necessarily attractive, seeking for some possibly
permanent principle of government, and disgusted with the everlasting
flux of Hellenic politics. Nor was there anything strange in imagining an
ideal state in which sound principles might be carried into effect. The
foundation of colonies, in which the settlers made a fresh start as new
communities, was traditionally a Greek custom. Such was the foundation,
logical and apparently consistent with experience, on which Plato
designed to build an Utopia. Avoiding the unscientific _laisser-faire_ of
democratic politics, functions were to be divided on a rational system,
and government placed in the hands of trained specialists.

It is well to note some of the defects of Greek civilization as Plato
saw it, particularly in Athens. The confusion and weakness of democratic
government, largely the fruit of ignorance haste and prejudice, has
been referred to above. In most states the free citizen population
were born and bred at the will of their fathers under no scientific
state-regulation, not sifted out in youth by scientific selection, and
only trained up to the average standard locally approved. Something
better was needed, if more was to be got out of human capacity. But it
seems certain that Plato found the chief and most deep-seated source
of social and political evils in the economic situation. The unequal
distribution of wealth and the ceaseless struggle between rich and
poor lay at the root of that lack of harmonious unity in which he saw
the cause of the weakness and unhappiness of states. To get rid of
the plutocrat and the beggar[300] was a prime object. Confiscation
and redistribution[301] offered no lasting remedy, so long as men
remained what they were. A complete moral change was necessary, and this
could only be effected by an education that should train all citizens
cheerfully and automatically to bear their several parts in promoting
the happiness of all. There must be no more party-strivings after
the advantage of this or that section: the guiding principle must be
diversity of individual functions combined with unity of aim. An ideal
state must be the Happy Land of the Expert, and each specialist must
mind his own business. Thus each will enjoy his own proper happiness:
friction competition and jealousy will pass away. There will be no more
hindrance to the efficiency of craftsmen: we shall not see one tempted
by wealth[302] to neglect his trade, while another is too poor to buy
the appliances needed for turning out good work. The expert governors
or Guardians must be supplied with all necessaries[303] by the classes
engaged in the various forms of production. Thus only can they be removed
from the corruptions that now pervert politicians. To them at least all
private property must be denied. And, in order that they may be as expert
in their own function of government as other craftsmen are in their
several trades, they must be bred selected and educated on a strictly
scientific system the very opposite of the haphazard methods now in vogue.

This brief sketch of the critical and constructive scope of the
_Republic_ must suffice for my purpose. Plato laid his finger on grave
defects, but his remedies seem fantastic in the light of our longer and
more varied experience. Any reform of society had to be carried out
by human agency, and for the difficulty of adapting this no adequate
allowance is made. He recognizes the difficulty of starting an ideal
community on his model. Old prejudices will be hard to overcome. So he
suggests[304] that it will be necessary for the philosophical rulers
to clear the ground by sending all the adult inhabitants out into
the country, keeping in the city only the children of ten years and
under: these they will train up on their system. He implies that with
the younger generation growing up under properly regulated conditions
the problems of establishment will solve themselves by the effect of
time. This grotesque proposal may indicate that Plato did not mean his
constructive design to be taken very seriously. But a more notable
weakness appears in the narrowness of outlook. It was natural that a
Greek should think and write as a Greek for Greeks, and seek lessons in
Greek experience. But the blight of disunion and failure was already
on the little Greek states; and their experience, not likely to recur,
has in fact never really recurred. Hence the practical value of Plato’s
stimulating criticism and construction is small. In the labour-question
we find no advance. Slavery is assumed as usual, but against the
enslavement of Greeks, of which recent warfare supplied many examples,
he makes[305] a vigorous protest. Euripides had gone further than this,
and questionings of slavery had not been lacking. Another very Greek
limitation of view comes out in the contempt[306] for βαναυσία, the
assumed physical and moral inferiority of persons occupied in sedentary
trades. That such men were unfitted for the rough work of war, and
therefore unfitted to take part in ruling an independent Greek state,
was an opinion not peculiar to Plato. But this objection could not well
be raised against the working farmer. Why then does Plato exclude the
farmer-class from a share in the government of his ideal state? I think
we may detect three reasons. First, the husbandman, though necessary
to the state’s existence, has not the special training required for
government, nor the leisure to acquire it. Second, it is his intense
occupation that alone secures to the ruling class the leisure needful for
their responsible duties. Third, the belief[307] that a man cannot be at
the same time a good husbandman and a good soldier. These three may be
regarded as one: the philosopher would get rid of haphazard amateurism
by making the expert specialist dominant in all departments of civil and
military life. The influence of the Spartan system (much idealized), and
the growth of professional soldiering, on his theories is too obvious to
need further comment.

Reading the _Republic_ from the labour-question point of view, one is
struck by the lack of detail as to the condition of the classes whose
labour feeds and clothes the whole community. We must remember that the
dialogue starts with an attempt to define Justice, in the course of which
a wider field of inquiry is opened up by assuming an analogy[308] between
the individual and the state. As the dominance of his nobler element over
his baser elements is the one sure means of ensuring the individual’s
lasting happiness, so the dominance of the nobler element in the state
alone offers a like guarantee. On these lines the argument proceeds,
using an arbitrary psychology, and a fanciful political criticism to
correspond. The construction of a model state is rather incidental than
essential to the discussion. No wonder that, while we have much detail
as to the bodily and mental equipment of the ‘Guardians’ (both the
governing elders and the warrior youths) we get no information as to the
training of husbandmen and craftsmen. Like slaves, they are assumed to
exist: how they become and remain what they are assumed to be, we are
not told. We are driven to guess that at this stage of his speculations
Plato was content to take over these classes just as he found them in
the civilization of his day. But he can hardly have imagined that they
would acquiesce in any system by which they would be excluded from all
political power. The hopeless inferiority of the husbandman is most
clearly marked when contrasted with the young warriors of the ‘Guardian’
class. Duties are so highly specialized that men are differentiated
for life. The γεωργὸς cannot be a good soldier. But if a soldier
shews cowardice he is to be punished[309] by being made a γεωργὸς or
δημιουργός—a degradation in itself, and accompanied by no suggestion of
a special training being required to fit him for his new function. It is
unnecessary to enlarge on such points: constructors of Utopias cannot
avoid some inconsistencies and omissions. The simple fact is that the
arrangements for differentiation of classes in the model state are not
fully worked out in detail.

Plato’s Guardians are to have no private property; for it is private
property[310] that seems to him the cause of sectional and personal
interests which divide and weaken the state and lead to unhappiness. But
the other classes are not so restricted. They can own land and houses
etc; on exactly what tenure, is less clear. Meanwhile, what is it that
the Guardians have in common? It is the sustenance (τροφὴ) provided as
pay (μισθὸς) for their services by the mass of workers over whom they
rule. It is expressly stated[311] that in the model state the Demos will
call the Rulers their Preservers and Protectors, and the Rulers call the
Demos their Paymasters and Sustainers. In existing states other than
democracies their mutual relation is too often expressed as that of
Masters and Slaves. I cannot refrain from noting that, if the pay of the
Guardians consists in their sustenance, this is so far exactly the case
of slaves. That power and honour should be reserved for men maintained
thus, without private emoluments, is remarkable. The Spartiates, however
much an idealizing of their system may have suggested the arrangement,
were maintained by the sulky labour of Helot serfs. Are the husbandmen in
Plato’s scheme really any better than Helots? In describing the origin
of states in general, Plato finds the cause[312] of that development in
the insufficiency of individuals to meet their own needs. But in tracing
the process of the division of labour, and increasing complexity of
civilization, he ignores slavery, though slavery is often referred to
in various parts of the book. Now, if the husbandman has under him no
slaves, and is charged with the food-supply of his rulers, he comes very
near to the economic status of a serf. He works with his own hands, but
not entirely at his own will or for his own profit. And in one respect he
would, to Greek critics, seem inferior to a Spartan[313] Helot: he is, by
the extreme specializing system, denied all share in military service,
and so can hardly be reckoned a citizen at all. How came Plato to imagine
for a single moment that a free Greek would acquiesce in such a position?
I can only guess that the present position of working farmers and
craftsmen in trades seemed to him an intolerable one. If, as I believe
from the indications in Xenophon and other authorities, agriculture
and the various industries of Attica were now steadily passing into
the hands of slaveowning capitalists, and small men going to the wall,
there would be much to set a philosopher thinking and seeking some
way of establishing a wholesomer state of things. On this supposition
speculations, however fantastic and incapable of realization in fact,
might call attention to practical evils and at least prepare men’s minds
for practical remedies. In admitting the difficulty of making a fresh
start, and the certainty that even his model state would in time lose its
purity[314] and pass through successive phases of decay, Plato surely
warns us not to take his constructive scheme seriously. But whether
he really believed that free handworkers could (save in an oligarchy,
which[315] he detests,) be induced to submit to a ruling class, and be
themselves excluded on principle from political interests of any kind, is
more than I can divine.

That the scheme outlined in the _Republic_ was not a practical one was
confessed by Plato in his old age by producing the _Laws_, a work in
which the actual circumstances of Greek life were not so completely
disregarded. The main points that concern us are these. Government is to
be vested in a detailed code of laws, administered by magistrates elected
by the citizens. There is a Council and an Assembly. Pressure is put upon
voters, especially[316] on the wealthier voters, to make them vote. The
influence of the Solonian model is obvious. Provision is made[317] for
getting over the difficulties of the first start, while the people are
still under old traditions which the new educational system will in due
course supersede. But, so far from depending on perfect Guardians with
absolute power, and treating law as a general pattern[318] modifiable in
application by the Guardians at their discretion, we have law supreme and
Guardians dependent on the people’s will. It is a kind of democracy, but
Demos is to be carefully trained, and protected from his own vagaries
by minute regulations. The number of citizens[319] is by law fixed at
5040. Each one has an allotment of land, a sacred κλῆρος that cannot
be sold. This passes by inheritance from father to son as an undivided
whole. Extinction of a family may be prevented by adoptions under strict
rules. Excess of citizen population may be relieved by colonies. Poverty
is excluded[320] by the minimum guaranteed in the inalienable land-lot,
excessive wealth by laws fixing a maximum. It is evident that in this
detailed scheme of the _Laws_ agriculture must have its position more
clearly defined than in the _Republic_.

So indeed it has. In order that all may have a fair share, each
citizen’s land-lot[321] is in two parts, one near the city, the other
near the frontier. Thus we see that all citizens will be interested
in cultivating the land. We see also that this will be absolutely
necessary: for it is intended[322] that the model state shall not be
dependent on imported food (like Athens), but produce its own supply.
Indeed commerce is to be severely restricted. What the country cannot
produce must if necessary be bought, and for this purpose only[323]
will a recognized Greek currency be employed: internal transactions
will be conducted with a local coinage. The evil effects[324] seen to
result from excessive commercial dealings will thus be avoided. When
we turn to the agricultural labour-question, we find that wholesale
employment of slaves[325] or serfs is the foundation of the system. For
Plato, holding fast to the principle of specialization, holds also that
leisure[326] is necessary for the citizens if they are to bear their part
in politics with intelligent judgment. As, in this second-best Utopia,
the citizens are the landowners, and cannot divest themselves of their
civic responsibilities, they must do their cultivating by deputy. And
this practically amounts to building the fabric of civilization on a
basis of slavery—nothing less. In the matter of agriculture, the industry
on which this self-sufficing community really rests, this dependence
on slave-labour is most striking. It even includes a system[327] of
serf-tenants (probably for the borderland farms) who are to be left
to cultivate the land, paying a rent or quota of produce (ἀπαρχὴ) to
the owners. The importance of not having too large a proportion[328]
of the slaves in a gang drawn from any one race is insisted on as a
means of preventing combinations and risings. At the same time careful
management is enjoined, sympathetic[329] but firm: a master should be
kind, but never forget that he is a master: no slave must be allowed to
take liberties. To implant a sound tradition of morality is recognized
as a means of promoting good order in the community, and this influence
should be brought to bear[330] on slaves as well as on freemen. Yet
the intrinsic chattelhood of the slave appears clearly in many ways;
for instance, the damage to a slave is made good by compensating[331]
his owner. The carelessness of ill-qualified practitioners[332] who
treat slaves, contrasted with the zeal of competent doctors in treating
freemen, is another significant touch.

It seems then that Plato, the more he adapts his speculations to
the facts of existing civilization, the more positively he accepts
slave-labour as a necessary basis. The conception of government
as an art is surely the chief cause of this attitude. The extreme
specialization of the _Republic_ is moderated in the _Laws_, but there
is not much less demand for leisure, if the civic artists are to be
unhampered in the practice of their art. Of the dangers[333] of servile
labour on a large scale he was well aware, and he had evidently studied
with attention[334] the awkward features of serfdom, not only in the
old Hellas, but in the Greek colonial states of the East and West.
Nevertheless he would found his economy on the forced labour of human
chattels. A system that had grown up in the course of events, extending
or contracting according to changes of economic circumstance, was thus
presented as the deliberate result of independent thought. But the
only theory at the back of traditional slavery was the law[335] of
superior force—originally the conqueror’s will. Plato was therefore
driven to accept this law as a principle of human society. To accept
it was to bring his speculations more into touch with Greek notions;
for no people have surpassed the Greeks in readiness to devolve upon
others the necessary but monotonous drudgery of life. This attitude of
his involves the conclusion that the Barbarian is to serve the Greek, a
position hardly consistent with his earlier[336] doctrine, that no true
line could be drawn distinguishing Greek and Barbarian. Such a flux of
speculative opinion surely weakens our respect for Plato’s judgment in
these matters. We can hardly say that he offers any effective solution of
the great state-problems of his age. But that these problems were serious
and disquieting his repeated efforts bear witness. And one of the most
serious was certainly that of placing the agricultural interest on a
sound footing. Its importance he saw: but neither of his schemes, neither
passive free farmers nor slave-holding landlords, was likely to produce
the desired result. To say this is not to blame a great man’s failure.
Centuries have passed, and experience has been gained, without a complete
solution being reached: the end is not yet.

A few details remain to be touched on separately. The employment of hired
labourers is referred to as normal[337] in the _Politicus_ _Republic_
and _Laws_. They are regarded simply as so much physical strength at
disposal. They are free, and so able to transfer their labour from job
to job according to demand. Intellectually and politically they do not
count. But the μισθωτὸς is neither a chattel like the slave, nor bound
to the soil like the serf. I have found no suggestion of the employment
of this class in agriculture; and, as I have said above, I believe that
they were in fact almost confined to the towns, especially such as the
Peiraeus. It is also worth noticing that we find favourable mention of
apprenticeship[338] as a method of learning a trade. But this principle
also seems not applied to agriculture. Again, we are told[339] in the
_Laws_ that one who has never served (δουλεύσας) will never turn out a
creditable master (δεσπότης). From the context this would seem to refer
only to the wardens of the country (ἀγρονόμοι), who must be kept under
strict discipline in order to perform very responsible duties. It does
not apply to farmers. Another curious rule[340] is that kidnapping of
men is not to be allowed. Yet there are bought slaves, and therefore a
market. That the dealer in human flesh should be despised[341] by his
customers is a feeling probably older than Plato, and it lasted down
to the days of _Uncle Tom’s Cabin_. In view of Plato’s acceptance of
the sharp line drawn between Greek and Barbarian (and this does touch
rustic slavery) it is interesting to note that he observed[342] with
care the different characters of alien peoples. He also refers[343] to
them without contempt in various contexts side by side with Greeks, and
cites[344] their common belief as a proof of the existence of the gods.

If I may venture to make a general comment on Plato’s position in
relation to the labour-question, I would remark that he is already in
the same difficulty which proved embarrassing to Aristotle, and which
has always beset those who seek to find a theoretical justification for
slavery. True, he is less definite and positive than Aristotle, but the
attempt to regard a human being as both a man and a chattel is a failure.
This point need not be further pressed here. But it is well to observe
that agriculture is the department in which the absurdity most strikingly
appears. Heavy farm-labour without prospect of personal advantage was
recognized as a function that no man would willingly perform. Hence to
be sent to labour on a farm was one of the punishments that awaited the
offending domestic slave. Hence overseers were employed to exact from
rustic slaves their daily task under the menace of severe and often cruel
punishments. Hence the humaner masters (as Xenophon shews us) tried to
secure more cheerful and effective service by a system of little rewards
for good work. In short there was in practical life a miserable attempt
to treat the slave both as a brute beast and as a moral being capable
of weighing consequences and acting accordingly. One form of reward,
manumission, was apparently not at this time common[345] in Greece:
and it was one not easy to apply in agriculture. It was not easy to
know what to do with a worn-out farm-hand, unless he was transferred to
lighter duties on the farm; for he would be useless elsewhere. Sooner or
later a time would come when he could no longer do anything of any value.
What then? Was he charitably fed by the master[346] whom he had served,
or was he cast adrift in nominal freedom? From the fragments of Comedy
one may perhaps guess that the humaner practice generally prevailed. But
the silence of Plato seems to suggest that to him, and indeed to Greeks
generally, the point was not an important one. Even for a citizen, if
destitute in old age, the state-relief was very small. We must therefore
not wonder at the silence generally maintained as to the treatment of the
worn-out rustic slave. Slave artisans, and those whose services were let
out to other employers with reservation of a rent to their own masters,
could scrape together the means of sustenance in their old age. It is
possible that manumission of rustic slaves may have occasionally taken
place, and that they too may have scraped together some small savings:
but I can find no ground for thinking that such cases were normal or even
frequent. In the _Laws_ Plato allows for the presence of freedmen[347],
and frames regulations for their control, probably suggested by
experience of the Attic laws and their defects. Manumission by the
state[348] as reward of slave-informers is also mentioned. But there
is nothing in these passages to weaken the natural inference that town
slaves, and chiefly domestics, are the class to whom in practice such
rules would apply. In short, we must not look to a philosopher reared in
a civilization under which manual labour tended to become the burden of
the unfree and the destitute, and to be despised as mean and unworthy of
the free citizen, for a wholesome solution of the problem of farm-labour.


XVI. THE EARLIER ATTIC ORATORS.

It is convenient to take the speeches and pamphlets of the masters of
Attic oratory in two sections, though there can be no exact chronological
division between the two. The political background is different in the
two cases. To Isocrates the urgent problem is how to compose Greek
jealousies by uniting in an attack on the common enemy, Persia: to
Demosthenes it is how to save the separate independence of the weary
Greek states from the control of the encroaching king of Macedon. True,
the disunion of Greece was not to be ended by either effort. But the
difficulties of Isocrates lay largely outside Athens: the states did not
want to have a leader; Philip, to whom he turned in his old age, was no
more welcome to them than the rest of his proposed leaders. Demosthenes
had to face the fact of a Macedonian party in Athens itself, as well as
to overcome the apathy and inertia which had been growing continually
since the fall of the Athenian empire. His opponents were not all mere
corrupt partisans of the Macedonian king. Athens was now no longer a
great power, and they knew it: Demosthenes is forgiven by historians for
his splendid defiance of facts. Naturally enough, in the conflicts of
political opinion from the time of the revolution of the Four Hundred
to the death of Demosthenes (411-322 BC) we have few references to
agriculture. Yet we know that the question of food-supply was still a
pressing one for many Greek states, above all for Athens. Some of the
references have a value as being contemporary. But a large part of these
are references to litigation, and deal not with conditions of cultivation
but with claims to property. Among the most significant facts are the
importance attached to the control of the Hellespontine trade-route and
the careful regulations affecting the import and distribution[349] of
corn.

The period on which we get some little light from passages in the
earlier orators is roughly about 410-350 BC. It includes the general
abandonment of agricultural enterprises abroad, owing to the loss of
empire and therewith of cleruchic properties. By this shrinkage the
relative importance of home agriculture must surely have been increased.
Yet I cannot find a single direct statement or reference to this effect.
It seems reasonable to suppose that it was not necessary to assert what
was only too obvious. Corn had to be imported, and imported it was from
various[350] sources of supply. To guard against failure of this supply
was a chief preoccupation of the Athenian government. But that some corn
was still grown in Attica is clear. Isocrates says[351] that one act of
hostility to the Thirty was the destruction of corn in the country by the
democrats. And in another place[352] he lays stress upon the mythical
legend of the earliest introduction of corn-growing, the civilizing gift
of Demeter to her favoured Attica. Yet there are signs that the culture
of the olive and vine was more and more displacing cereal crops: the fig
tree, often a sacred thing, was, and had long been, a regular feature
of the countryside. Live stock, goats sheep and cattle, were probably
abundant, though there was seldom need for an orator to mention them.
If we judge by the remaining references, it would seem that land was
not generally cultivated by its owners. Letting to tenant farmers[353]
was the plan adopted by the state in dealing with public lands, and
the collection of the rents was farmed out in its turn to capitalist
speculators by public auction. We have several specimens[354] of mixed
estates, described by an orator in connexion with some litigation. From
these we may fairly infer that the policy of not putting all their
eggs into one basket found favour with Athenian capitalists. Landed
estate is in such cases but one item, side by side with house-property,
mortgages and money at interest on other securities, slaves and other
stock employed or leased to employers, stock in hand, specie and other
valuables, mentioned in more or less detail. Consistently with this
picture of landlord and tenant is the statement[355] that formerly, in
the good old times before Athens entered upon her ill-starred career
of imperialism, the country houses and establishments of citizens
were superior to those within the city walls; so much so, that even
the attraction of festivals could not draw them to town from their
comfortable country-seats. Evidently a great change had come over rural
Attica, if the writer is to be trusted. We are not to suppose that
personal direction of a farm by the owner of the land was altogether
a thing of the past. Suburban farms at least were, as we learn from
Xenophon, sometimes managed by men living in the city and riding out to
superintend operations and give orders. The injured husband[356] defended
by =Lysias= may even have gone to and fro on foot. He does not seem to
have been a wealthy man, and he may have been a αὐτουργός, taking part in
the labours of his farm: that he earned his night’s rest and slept sound
seems suggested by the context of his curious story.

That there was no lack of interest in the prospects of agriculture
generally may be inferred from various references to the different
qualities of soils not only in Attica but in other parts of Greece and
abroad. The smallness of the cultivable area in rocky Samothrace[357]
was noted by =Antiphon=. =Isocrates= remarked[358] that in Laconia the
Dorian conquerors appropriated not only the greater part of the land
but the most fertile. The results of their greed and oppression had not
been wholly satisfactory in the long run: adversity carried with it the
peril[359] of Helot risings. No fertility of soil can compensate for
the ill effects of bad policy and lack of moderation: the independence
and wellbeing of cramped rocky Megara, contrasted[360] with the
embarrassments of wide fruitful Thessaly, is an object-lesson. The
Greek race needs to expand[361], as it did of old, when Athens led the
colonization of the Asiatic seaboard. It is monstrous to try and wring
contributions from (δασμολογεῖν)[362] the islanders, who have to till
mountain sides for lack of room. It is in Asia that the new Greece must
find relief, at the expense of Persia, whose subjects let vast areas
lie idle, while the parts that they do cultivate keep them in great
plenty; so fertile is the land. Attica itself was once a prosperous
farming country. In the good old days, before the unhappy dissension
between selfish rich and grudging poor, agriculture was one of the chief
means[363] used to avert poverty and distress. Farms let at fair rents
kept the people profitably employed, and so out of mischief. Men could
and did[364] live well in the country: they were not jostling each other
in the city to earn a bare subsistence by pitiful state-fees—beggars
all—as they are doing now. The great pamphleteer may be overdrawing his
picture, but that it contains much truth is certain, and it seems pretty
clear that he saw no prospect of a local revival. Athens had run her
course of ambitious imperialism, and the old country life, developed in
long security, could not be restored. Any man who felt inclined to live
a farmer’s life would, if I read the situation aright, prefer some cheap
and profitable venture abroad to the heavy and unremunerative struggles
of a crofter in upland Attica. Small farms in the rich lowland were I
take it very seldom to be had. And, if he had the capital to work a large
farm, he was under strong temptation to employ his capital in urban
industries, state-contracts, loans at interest, etc, and so to distribute
his risks while increasing his returns. For his main object was to
make money, not to provide himself and his family with a healthy and
comfortable home. The land-question in Attica is illustrated by a passage
of =Isaeus= in which he refers to the fraud of a guardian. The scoundrel,
he says, has robbed his nephew of the estate: he is sticking to the farm
(τὸν ἀγρόν) and has given him a hill pasture[365] (φελλέα).

Farming enterprise abroad had been a product of the Athenian empire
with its cleruchies and colonies, and probably private ventures of
individuals, unofficial but practically resting on imperial protection.
The collapse of this system would ruin some settlers and speculators,
and impoverish more. Even those who returned to Athens still possessed
of considerable capital would not in all cases take to Attic farming,
even supposing that they were willing to face its risks and that suitable
farms were available. It was to Athens a most important object to retain
or recover all she could of her island territories, partly no doubt in
order to control the cultivable lands in them. In the peace-negotiations
of 390 BC the extreme opposition party at Athens were not content[366]
with the proposals by which she was to recover the islands of Lemnos
Imbros and Scyros: they demanded also the restitution of the Thracian
Chersonese and estates and debts elsewhere. So strong was the feeling of
dependence on these investments abroad. And =Isocrates=, in depicting the
evil results of imperial ambition, recalls[367] to the citizens that,
instead of farming the lands of others, the Peloponnesian war had for
years prevented them from setting eyes upon their own.

Thus far I have said nothing of the labour-question. Orators and
pamphleteers were not likely to concern themselves much with this topic,
for there was nothing in the nature of an Abolitionist controversy
to bring them into discussion of the subject. Slavery is in this
department of Greek literature more a fundamental assumption than ever.
The frequent arguments on the torture of slave witnesses and the moral
value of evidence so extracted are plain proof of this. But what about
agricultural labour? In the case of the sacred olive-stump we hear from
=Lysias=[368] that the farm in question several times changed hands by
sale. Some of the purchasers let it to tenants. The words used of the
persons who actually farmed it from time to time are the usual ones,
ἐγεώργει, εἰργάσατο etc. That these tenants were not merely αὐτουργοί,
but employers of labour, may fairly be guessed from the case of the
present tenant, accused of sacrilege. He at least is an owner of slaves,
and argues[369] that he could never have been so mad as to put himself
at their mercy. They would have witnessed his sacrilege, and could have
won their freedom by informing against their master. Isocrates[370] draws
no real distinction between serfs and slaves in the case of Sparta. Here
too the slave was dangerous, though in a different way: but he was on
the land. A fragment of =Isaeus=[371] runs ‘he left on the farm old men
and cripples.’ The context is lost, but the persons referred to must
surely be slaves: no one would employ wage-labour of this quality. In
another place he casually mentions[372] the sale of a flock of goats with
the goatherd. These little scraps of evidence all serve to strengthen
the impression, derived from other sources, of slave-labour as the
backbone of Attic agriculture in this period. To free labour there are
very few references, and none of these seem to have any connexion with
agriculture. This does not prove that no hired freemen were employed
on farms. For special jobs, as we shall see later, they were called in:
but this was only temporary employment. The μισθτοὶ or θῆτες were a
despised[373] class: some of them were freedmen. The competition with
slave-labour doubtless had something to do with this, and to be driven
by necessity to such labour was galling to a citizen, as we have already
learnt from Xenophon.


XVII. ARISTOTLE.

The great founder of the philosophy of experience is a witness[374] of
exceptional value. He collected and recorded the facts and traditions
of the past, judging them from the point of view of his own day.
Stimulated by the theories of his master Plato, he also strove, by
sketching the fabric of a model state, to indicate the lines on which
Greek political development might be conducted with advantage. Inasmuch
as ideal circumstances were rather to be desired than expected, he
did not restrict his interest in the future to the mere designing
of an ideal: taking states as he found them, conditioned by their
situation and past history, he sought for the causes of their growth and
decay, and aimed at discovering cures for their various maladies. But
throughout, whether looking to the past or the future, he was guided by
a characteristic moral purpose. For him ‘good living’ (τὸ εὖ ζῆν) is the
aim and object of political institutions. It is in the state that man
finds the possibility of reaching his full development: for he is by
nature a ‘political animal.’ That is, he cannot live alone. Each step in
association (household, village,) brings him nearer to that final union
of the city. In this he attains the highest degree of manhood of which
he (as Man, differentiated from other animals by reason and speech,) is
capable. This completion of his potentialities is the proof of his true
nature; that he realizes his best self in the πόλις shews that he is a
πολιτικὸν ζῷον. The animal needs met in the more primitive associations
are of course met in the city also. But there is something more, and this
something more is a moral element, from which is derived the possibility
of ‘good living,’ as contrasted with existence of a more predominantly
animal character. Therefore, though in point of time the man comes before
the state, in logical order the state comes first: for the man can only
exist in the fulness of his nature when he is a citizen. He is by the law
of his nature part of a state, potentially: as such a part he is to be
regarded. As states vary, so do the several types of citizens. In the
best state the qualities of good man and good citizen are identical and
complete.

The aim of political science (πολιτική) is to frame and employ the
machinery of states so as to promote the perfection of human excellence
(ἀρετή), and to train the citizens on such principles as will insure
the effective working and permanence of their institutions. We may call
it Aristotle’s response to the Greek yearning after a stability which
was in practice never attained. To design a model state was one way
of approaching the problem. But Aristotle was surely not the man to
believe that such an ideal could be practically realised. To make the
best of existing systems was a more promising enterprise. Now in either
procedure it was evident that material equipment[375] could not be left
out of account. Without food clothing and shelter men cannot live at
all, and therefore cannot live well. Experience also shewed that the
means of defence against enemies could not safely be neglected. It is
under the head of equipment (χορηγία) that we get the philosopher’s
view of the proper position of agriculture in the life of a state. We
must bear in mind the general Greek conception of citizenship common to
statesmen and theorists, present to Plato and Aristotle no less than to
Cleisthenes or Pericles. Residence gave no claim to it. Either it was
hereditary, passing from father to son on proof of citizen descent and
certain religious qualifications; or it was deliberately conferred on a
person or persons as a privilege. That beside the citizens there should
be resident within the state[376] a number of persons, not citizens or
likely to become citizens, was a necessity generally admitted. They
might be free aliens, more or less legally connected with the state, or
slaves public or private. These alien persons were very numerous in some
states, such as Athens or Corinth. Subject or serf populations of Greek
origin, as in Laconia or Thessaly, are not to be distinguished from them
for the present purpose. One common mark of citizenship was the right of
owning land within the territory of the state. We know that the Attic
landowner must be an Athenian citizen, and such was the general rule.
Who did the actual work of cultivation, or tended the flocks and herds,
is another question. We have seen reason for believing that personal
labour[377] of the owner on his farm had at one time been usual, and that
the practice still in the fourth century BC prevailed in those parts
of Greece where there had been little development of urban life. And
that slave-labour was employed by farmers on a greater or less scale,
according to the size of their estates, seems as certain as certain
can be. In Attica the slave overseer, entrusted with the direction of
a gang of slave labourers, had become[378] a well-recognized figure,
and farming by deputy, as well as labouring by deputy, was an ordinary
thing. Citizens resided in the city more than ever. Rich men visited
their country estates to keep an eye on their overseers, or paid the
penalty of their neglect. Poor citizens, resident and able to attend
meetings of the Assembly, had to be kept quiet by systematic provision
of fees for performance of civic functions. It may be too strong to say
that squeezing the wealthy was the leading fact of politics: but there
was too much of that sort of thing, and the scramble for state pay was
demoralizing. Immediate personal interest tended to deaden patriotism in
a state that within human memory had, whatever its faults, been the most
public-spirited community among the leading states of Greece.

In treating of politics, and therewith in assigning a position to
agriculture, Aristotle was affected by three main influences. First,
the historical; the experience of Greek states, and more particularly
of Athens. Secondly, the theoretical; the various attempts of earlier
philosophers, particularly of Plato, to find a solution of political
problems on speculative lines. Thirdly, his own firm conviction that
the lasting success of state life depended on devotion to a moral end.
It will be the simplest and best plan to consider his utterances on
agriculture from these three points of view.

The supply of food being the first of necessities, and being in fact
(as we have seen) an ever-pressing problem in Greece, it is no wonder
that land-hunger, leading to wars for territory, and land-grabbing,
a fertile cause of internal dissension and seditions in states, were
normal phenomena of Greek history. And what happened in old Hellas was
reproduced abroad, as the Greek colonists overflowed into lands beyond
the seas. Once the possession of territory was secured by war, and the
means of its defence organized, two problems soon presented themselves
for solution. It was at once necessary to decide by what labour the land
was to be cultivated. Greek colonists, desirous no doubt of an easier
life than they had led in the old country, generally contrived to devolve
this labour upon others at a very early stage of their establishment.
Either they reduced natives to the condition of serfs, or they employed
slaves, whom the profits of growing trade and commerce enabled them to
procure in larger and larger numbers. Meanwhile in the mother country
various systems went on side by side. There were large districts of
agricultural serfage, in which a race of conquerors were supported by the
labour of the conquered. In other parts independent peoples, backward in
civilization, lived a free rustic life of a largely pastoral character.
Others again devoted themselves more to the tillage of the soil, with
or without the help of slaves. It was known that in earlier times a
population of this kind in Attica had long existed, and that after the
unification of Attica and the reforms of Solon it had for a time been the
backbone of the Athenian state. But in fertile lowland districts there
was a not unnatural tendency towards larger estates, worked by hireling
or slave-labour. It seems fairly certain that in Attica before the time
of Aristotle the supply of free wage-earners for farm-work was failing:
the development of the city and the Peiraeus, and the growing number of
those in receipt of civil and military pay, had drawn the poor citizen
away from rustic labour. Nor is there reason to think that after the loss
of empire there was any marked movement back to the land on the part of
free labourers or even small farmers. It would rather seem that Attic
land was passing into fewer hands, and that the employment of stewards or
overseers, free or slave, was one of the features of a change by which
the farming of land was becoming a symptom of considerable wealth.

But beside the decision as to labour there was the question as to a means
of checking land-monopoly. Such monopoly, resulting in the formation
of a discontented urban mob, was a serious menace to the stability of
a constitution. For all poor citizens to get a living by handicrafts
was perhaps hardly possible; nor would the life of an artisan suit the
tastes and wishes of all. Nature does (or seems to do) more for the
farmer on his holding than for the artisan in his workshop, and the
claim to a share of the land within the boundaries of their states had
led to seditions and revolutions, ruinous and bloody, followed by ill
feeling, and ever liable to recur. Colonial states, in which the first
settlers usually allotted the land (or most of it) among themselves
and handed down their allotments to their children, were particularly
exposed to troubles of this kind. The various fortunes of families, and
the coming of new settlers, early raised the land-question there in an
acute form, as notoriously at Syracuse. No wonder that practical and
theoretical statesmen tried to find remedies for a manifest political
evil. Stability was only to be assured by internal peace. To this end two
main lines of policy[379] found favour. Security of tenure was promoted
by forbidding the sale of land-lots or making it difficult to encumber
them by mortgages: while the prohibition of excessive acquisition[380]
was a means of checking land-grabbers and interesting a larger number of
citizens in the maintenance of the land-system. But there is no reason
to think that measures of this kind had much success. Nor were vague
traditions[381] of the equality of original land-lots in some Greek
states of any great importance. Some theoretical reformers might aim
at such an arrangement, but it was a vain aspiration. Indeed, regarded
from the food-producing point of view, nothing like a true equality was
possible in practice. Confiscation and redistribution were only to be
effected at the cost of civil war, and the revered wisdom of Solon[382]
had rejected such a proceeding. Communistic schemes had little attraction
for the average Greek, so far as his own labour or interests might be
involved: even the dream of Plato was far from a thoroughgoing communism.

Of the farmer in his character of citizen[383] Aristotle had a favourable
impression formed from the experience of the past. The restless activity
of Assemblies frequently meeting, and with fees for attendance, was both
a cause and an effect of the degeneration of democracies in his day. It
meant that political issues were now at the mercy of the ignorant and
fickle city-dwellers, a rabble swayed by the flattery of self-seeking
demagogues. Athens was the notable instance. Yet tradition alleged (and
it can hardly be doubted) that in earlier times, when a larger part of
the civic body lived and worked in the country, a soberer and steadier
policy[384] prevailed. The farmers, never free from responsibilities and
cares, were opposed to frequent Assemblies, to attend which involved
no small sacrifice of valuable time. For this sacrifice a small fee
would have been no adequate compensation, and in fact they had none
at all. Naturally enough Aristotle, admitting[385] that in the states
of his day democratic governments were mostly inevitable, insists on
the merits of the farmer-democracies of the good old times, and would
welcome their revival. But the day for this was gone by, never to return.
Another important point arises in connexion with the capacity of the
state for war, a point seldom overlooked in Greek political speculation.
In discussing the several classes out of which the state is made up,
Aristotle observes[386] that individuals may and will unite in their
own persons the qualifications of more than one class. So the same
individuals may perform various functions: but this does not affect his
argument, for the same persons may be, and often are, both hoplites and
cultivators, who yet are functionally distinct parts of the state. Just
below, speaking of the necessity of ‘virtue’ (ἀρετὴ) for the discharge of
certain public duties (deliberative and judicial), he adds ‘The other
faculties may exist combined in many separate individuals; for instance,
the same man may be a soldier a cultivator and a craftsman, or even a
counsellor of state or a judge; but all men claim to possess virtue, and
think they are qualified to hold most offices. But the same men cannot be
at once rich and poor. The common view therefore is that Rich and Poor
are the true _parts_ of a state.’ That is to say, practical analysis can
go no further. In another passage[387], discussing the formation of the
best kind of democracy, he says ‘for the best Demos is that of farmers
(ὁ γεωργικός): so it is possible to form (a corresponding?) democracy
where the mass of the citizens gets its living from tillage or pasturage
(ἀπὸ γεωργίας ἢ νομῆς).’ After considering the political merits of the
cultivators, busy and moderate men, he goes[388] on ‘And after the Demos
of cultivators the next best is that where the citizens are graziers
(νομεῖς) and get their living from flocks and herds (βοσκημάτων): for
the life in many respects resembles that of the tillers of the soil,
and for the purposes of military campaigning these men are peculiarly
hardened[389] by training, fit for active service, and able to rough
it in the open.’ The adaptability of the rustic worker is further
admitted[390] in a remark let fall in a part of his treatise where he is
engaged in designing a model state. It is to the effect that, so long as
the state has a plentiful supply of farm-labourers, it must also have
plenty of seamen (ναυτῶν). Having just admitted that a certain amount
of maritime commerce will be necessary, and also a certain naval power,
he is touching on the manning of the fleet. The marine soldiers will
be freemen, but the seamen (oarsmen) can be taken from unfree classes
working on the land. Their social status does not at this stage concern
us: that such labourers could readily be made into effective oarsmen is
an admission to be noted. To the philosopher himself it is a comfort
to believe that he has found out a way of doing without the turbulent
‘seafaring rabble’ (ναυτικὸς ὄχλος) that usually throngs seaport towns
and embarrasses orderly governments. In other words, it is a relief to
find that in a model state touching the sea it will not be necessary to
reproduce the Peiraeus.

In considering the proposals of earlier theorists for the remedy of
political defects it is hardly possible and nowise needful to exhaust all
the indications of dissatisfaction with existing systems. Of Euripides
and Socrates, the two great questioners, enough has been said above. The
reactionary Isocrates was for many years a contemporary of Aristotle.
What we can no longer reproduce is the talk of active-minded critics
in the social circles of Athens. It happens that Xenophon has left us a
sketch of the ordinary conversations of Socrates. No doubt these were
the most important examples of their kind, and his method a powerful, if
sometimes irritating, stimulus to thought. But we are not to assume a
lack of other questioners, acute and even sincere, more especially among
men of oligarchic leanings. That Aristotle came into touch with such
persons is probable from his connexion with Plato. Certain passages in
the _Constitution of Athens_, in which he is reasonably suspected[391]
of giving a partisan view of historical events, point to the same
conclusion. We shall never know all the criticisms and suggestions of
others that this watchful collector heard and noted. But it is both
possible and desirable to recall those to which his own record proves him
to have paid attention.

Both Hippodamus and Plato based their schemes on a class-system, in which
the farmer-class form a distinct body: but the former made them citizens
with voting rights. Being unarmed, and so at the mercy of the military
class, Aristotle held that their political rights were nugatory. In
the _Republic_, Plato gave them no voice in state-affairs, but in the
_Laws_ he admitted them to the franchise. While these two reformers made
provision for a military force, Phaleas, ignoring relations with other
states, made none. To Phaleas, equality in landed estate seemed the best
means of promoting harmony and wellbeing in the community; and he would
effect this equality by legal restrictions. This proposition Aristotle
rejected as neither adequate nor suited to its purpose. Moral[392]
influences, hard work, discretion, even intellectual activity, can alone
produce the temper of moderation that promotes concord and happiness. In
short, if you are to effect any real improvement, you must start from
the doctrine of the Mean[393] and not trust to material equalizing. The
several tenure of land-lots was generally recognized, with variations
in detail; Plato in the _Laws_ abandoned the impracticable land-system
of the _Republic_, and not only assigned a κλῆρος to each citizen
household, but arranged it in two[394] sections, for reasons given above.
The attempt to ensure the permanence of the number of land-lots and
households by strict legal regulation, as some legislators had tried to
do, is also a general feature of these speculations. Plato in the _Laws_
even went further, and would place rigid restrictions on acquisition of
property of all kinds. All agree in the usual Greek contempt for those
engaged in manual or sedentary trades. Such ‘mechanical’ (βάναυσοι)
workers were held to be debased in both body and mind below the standard
of ‘virtue’ required of the good soldier or citizen. Phaleas made these
‘artisans’ public slaves _de iure_: Hippodamus placed them, with the
farmers, in nominal citizenship but _de facto_ bondage. Plato tolerates
them because he cannot do without them. In the matter of hard bodily
labour, free or slave, the position of Plato is clear. He would devolve
it upon slaves; in agriculture, with a coexisting alternative system
of serf-tenants. But both classes are to be Barbarians. It seems that
Hippodamus meant the public, if not the private, land of his model
state to be worked by slaves. Most striking is the fact that Plato in
his later years combined the aim of self-sufficiency with dependence on
servile labour. Commerce is, for the moral health of the state, to be
strictly limited. The supply of necessary food-stuffs is to be a domestic
industry, carried on by alien serfs or slaves for the most part. Such
communism as exists among the Guardians in the _Republic_ is a communism
of consumers who take no part in material production: and it is abandoned
in the _Laws_.

The above outlines must suffice as a sketch of the situation both in
practice and in theory when Aristotle took the matter in hand. The
working defects of Greek constitutions were obvious to many, and the
incapacity of the ignorant masses in democracies was especially evident
to thoughtful but irresponsible critics. Yet the selfishness of the
rich in oligarchies was not ignored, and the instability of governments
supported by only a minority of the citizens was an indisputable fact.
The mass of citizens (that is, full members of the state according to the
qualification-rules in force) had to come in somewhere, to give numerical
strength to a government. How was governing capacity to be placed in
power under such conditions? Experience suggested that things had been
better for Athens when a larger part of her citizens lived on the land.
Use could no doubt be made of this experience in case an opening for
increasing the number of peasant farmers[395] should occur. But it was
precisely in states where such a policy was most needed that an opening
was least likely to occur. It would seem then that the only chance of
improving government lay in persuading the average citizen to entrust
wider powers to a specially selected body of competent men, in short to
carry into politics the specializing principle[396] already developed by
the advance of civilization in other departments. Now the average citizen
was certain to test the plans of reformers by considering how their
operation would affect cases like his own. It was therefore necessary
to offer him a reassuring picture of projects of this kind, if they
were to receive any hearing at all. To own a plot of land, inalienable
and hereditary, was a security against indigence. To have the labour of
cultivating it performed as a matter of course by others was a welcome
corollary. To be relieved of mechanical drudgery by aliens and slaves
was a proposal sure to conciliate Greek pride. And the resulting leisure
for the enlightened discharge of the peculiarly civic functions of war
and government was an appeal to self-esteem and ambition. But that the
creation of a ruling class of Guardians with absolute power, such as
those of Plato’s _Republic_, would commend itself to democratic Greeks,
was more than any practical man could believe. Nor would the communism
of those Guardians appear attractive to the favourers of oligarchy.
Therefore Plato himself had to recast his scheme, and try to bring it
out of dreamland by concessions to facts of Greek life. Not much was
gained thereby, and the great difficulty, how to make a start, still
remained. That much could be done by direct legislative action was a
tradition in Greek thought fostered by tales of the achievements of early
lawgivers. But to remodel the whole fabric of a state so thoroughly that
an entire change should be effected in the political atmosphere in which
the citizens must live and act, while the citizens themselves would be
the same persons, reared in old conditions and ideas, was a project far
beyond the scope of ordinary legislation. To Aristotle it seemed that the
problem must be approached differently.

This is not the place to discuss the two distinct lines taken by him;
first, that the character of the state depends on that of its members,
and secondly, that the individual only finds his true self as member of
a state. The subject has been fully[397] treated, better than I could
treat it; and in constructing a model there remains the inevitable
difficulty, where to begin. The highest development of the individual
is only attainable under the training provided by the model state, and
this state is only possible as an association of model citizens. If we
may conjecture Aristotle’s answer from a rule[398] laid down in the
_Ethics_, he would say ‘first learn by doing, and then you can do what
you have learnt to do.’ That is, effort (at first imperfect) will improve
faculty, and by creating habit will develope full capacity. But even so
it would remain uncertain whether the individual, starting on a career of
self-improvement, is to work up to the making of a model state, or the
imperfect state to start training its present citizens to perfection.
The practical difficulty is there still. Nor is it removed by putting
the first beginnings of training so early[399] that they even precede
the infant citizen’s birth, in the form of rules for eugenic breeding.
Aristotle’s procedure is to postulate favourable equipment, geographical
and climatic, a population of high qualities (that is, Greek,) and then
to consider how he would organize the state and train its members—if the
postulated conditions were realized and he had a free hand. In this new
Utopia it is most significant to observe what he adopts from historical
experience and the proposals of earlier theorists, and in what respects
he departs from them. It is in particular his attitude towards ownership
and tillage of land, and labour in general, that is our present concern.

As it follows from his doctrine of the Mean that the virtue of the state
and its several members must be based on the avoidance of extremes, so it
follows[400] from the moral aim of the state that its component elements
are not all ‘parts’ of the state in the same strict sense. Economically,
those who provide food clothing etc are parts, necessary to the existence
of the community. Politically (for politics have a moral end) they are
below the standard of excellence required for a share in the government
of a perfect state. They cannot have the leisure or the training to fit
them for so responsible a charge. Therefore they cannot be citizens. To
maintain secure independence and internal order the citizens, and the
citizens only, must bear arms. And, since the land must belong to the
possessors of arms, none but citizens can own land. This does not imply
communism. There will have to be public[401] land, from the produce of
which provision will be made for the service of religion and for the
common tables at which citizens will mess. To maintain these last by
individual contributions would be burdensome to the poor and tend to
exclude them. For rich and poor there will be. But the evil of extreme
poverty will be avoided. There will be private land, out of which each
citizen (that is evidently each citizen-household) will have an allotment
of land. This κλῆρος will be in two[402] parcels, one near the city
and the other near the state-frontier, so that issues of peace and war
may not be affected by the bias of local interests. The cultivation of
these allotments will be the work of subjects, either inhabitants of
the district (περίοικοι) or slaves; in any case aliens, not Greeks; and
in the case of slaves care must be taken not to employ too many of the
same race together or such as are high-spirited. He is concerned to
secure the greatest efficiency and to leave the least possible facilities
for rebellion. The labourers will belong to the state or to individual
citizens according to the proprietorship of the land on which they
are severally employed. By these arrangements he has provided for the
sustenance of those who in the true political sense are ‘parts’ of the
state (πόλις), and for their enjoyment of sufficient leisure[403] to
enable them to conduct its government in the paths of virtue and promote
the good life (τὸ εὖ ζῆν) which is the final cause of state existence.

The citizens then have the arms and the land and all political power.
Among themselves they are on an equal footing, only divided functionally
according to age: deliberative and judicial duties belonging to the elder
men, military activities to the younger. It is impossible to overlook
the influence of the Spartan system on the speculations of Aristotle as
well as those of Plato. The equality of Spartan citizens was regarded
as evidence[404] of a democratic element in their constitution, and we
find this same theoretical equality among the full citizens at any given
moment in the developing constitution of Rome. It is significant that
Aristotle felt the necessity of such an equality. He remarks[405] that
the permanence of a constitution depends on the will of the possessors
of arms. We may observe that he seldom refers to the mercenaries so
commonly employed in his day, save as his bodyguard of usurping tyrants.
But in one passage[406] he speaks of oligarchies being driven to employ
them at a pinch for their own security against the Demos, and of their
own overthrow in consequence. Therefore he did not ignore the risk run
by relying on hirelings: naturally he would prefer to keep the military
service of his model state in the hands of his model citizens. But he
had no belief[407] in the blind devotion of Sparta to mere preparation
for warfare. Peace is the end of war, not war of peace. If you do not
learn to make a proper use of peace, in the long run you will fail in war
also: hence the attainment of empire was the ruin of Sparta: she had not
developed the moral qualities needed for ruling in time of peace. But in
his model state he seems not to make adequate provision for the numbers
required in war. His agricultural labourers are not to be employed in
warfare, as the Laconian Helots regularly were. He only admits them to
the service of the oar, controlled by the presence of marine soldiers,
who are free citizens like the poorer class of Athenians who generally
served in that capacity. The servile character of rustic labour on his
plan is thus reasserted, and with it the superior standing of land forces
as compared with maritime. The days were past when Athenians readily
served at the oar in their own triremes, cruising among the subject
states and certain of an obsequious reception in every port. Hired
rowers had always been employed to some extent, even by Athens: in this
later period the motive power of war-gallies of naval states was more
and more obtained from slaves. There was an economic analogy between
farm-labour and oar-labour. The slave was forced to toil for practically
no more[408] than his food: the profits of the farm and the profits of
war-booty fell to be shared in either case by few.

Aristotle, who was well aware of the merits of the working farmer, the
peasant citizen, and recognized that such men had been a sound and
stable element in the Athens of former days, would surely not have
treated agriculture as a work reserved for servile hands, had he not been
convinced that the old rural economy was gone and could never be revived.
For, if suggestions from Sparta influenced him when designing Utopian
institutions, it is no less clear that the Utopian setting—territory,
city, port-town,—are merely modifications of Attica, Athens, Peiraeus. In
Greece there was no state so favoured geographically, so well equipped
by nature for independence prosperity and power. If a Greek community
was ever to realize an artistic ideal, and live in peaceful and secure
moderation a model life of dignity and virtue, it could hardly have a
better chance of success than in some such advantageous position as that
enjoyed by Athens. Her defects lay in her institutions, such as he viewed
them at their present stage of development. These could not be approved
as they stood: they needed both political and economic reform. Into the
former we need not enter here: the later democracy could not but disgust
one who judged merit from the standpoint of his doctrine of the Mean.
Economically, we may infer from his own model project that two great
changes would be required. Citizens must all have an interest in the
land, though farmed by slave labour. The port-town must no longer be a
centre of promiscuous commerce, thronged with a cosmopolitan population
of merchants seamen dock-labourers etc and the various purveyors who
catered for their various appetites. In truth the Peiraeus was a
stumbling-block to him as to Plato, and probably to most men[409] who did
not themselves draw income from its trade or its iniquities, or who did
not derive political power from the support of its democratic citizens.
To have a state ‘self-sufficing’ so far as to get its necessary food from
its own territory, and to limit commerce to a moderate traffic sufficient
to procure by exchange such things as the citizens wanted but could not
produce (for instance[410] timber), was a philosopher’s aspiration.

While proposing to restrict commercial activity as being injurious in
its effect, when carried to excess, on the higher life of the state,
Aristotle like Plato admits[411] that not only slaves but free aliens,
permanently or temporarily resident, must form a good part of the
population. He does not even[412] like Plato propose to fix a limit to
the permissible term of metic residence. Apparently he would let the
resident alien make his fortune in Utopia and go on living there as a
non-citizen of means. But he would not allow him to hold real property
within the state, as Xenophon or some other[413] writer had suggested.
That the services of aliens other than slaves were required for the
wellbeing of the state, is an important admission. For it surely implies
that there were departments of trade and industry in which slave-labour
alone was felt to be untrustworthy, while the model citizens of a
model state could not properly be so employed. The power of personal
interest[414] in promoting efficiency and avoiding waste is an elementary
fact not forgotten by Aristotle. Now the slave, having no personal
interest involved beyond escaping punishment, is apt to be a shirker and
a waster. The science of the master (δεσποτική)[415], we are told, is the
science of using slaves; that is, of getting out of them what can be got.
It is a science of no great scope or dignity. Hence busy masters employ
overseers. He suggests that some stimulus to exertion may be found in
the prospect of manumission[416] for good service. This occurs again in
the _Economics_, but the question of what is to become of the worn-out
rustic slave is not answered by him[417] any more than it is by Plato. My
belief is that, so far as farm staffs are concerned, he has chiefly if
not wholly in view cases[418] of stewards overseers etc. These would be
in positions of some trust, perhaps occasionally filled by freemen, and
to create in them some feeling of personal interest would be well worth
the masters while. Domestic slavery was on a very different footing, but
it too was often a worry[419] to masters. Here manumission played an
obvious and important part, and perhaps still more in the clerical staffs
of establishments for banking and other businesses. These phenomena of
Athenian life were interesting and suggestive. Yet Aristotle is even
more reticent[420] than Plato (and with less reason) on the subject of
manumission: which is matter for regret.

The model state then will contain plenty of free aliens, serving the
state with their talents and labour, an urban non-landholding element.
They set the model citizens free for the duties of politics and war.
Whether they will be bound to service in the army or the fleet, like the
Athenian metics, we are not told. Nor is it easy to guess how Aristotle
would have answered the question. Their main function is to carry on the
various meaner or ‘mechanical’ trades and occupations, no doubt employing
or not employing the help of slaves according to circumstances. All such
trades were held to have a degrading effect[421] on both body and mind,
disabling those practising them from attaining the highest excellence,
that is the standard of model citizens in war and peace. Aristotle finds
the essence of this taint in transgression of the doctrine of the Mean.
Specialization carried to extremes produces professionalism which, for
the sake of perfecting technical skill, sacrifices the adaptability, the
bodily suppleness and strength and the mental all-round alertness and
serene balance,—qualities which every intelligent Greek admired, and
which Aristotle postulated in the citizens of his model community. So
strong is his feeling on the point that it comes[422] out in connexion
with music. The young citizens are most certainly to have musical
training, but they are not to become professional performers; for this
sort of technical excellence is nothing but a form of βαναυσία.

If neither the farmer nor the artisan are to be citizens, and the
disqualification of the latter rests on his narrow professionalism, we
are tempted to inquire whether the claim of the farmer may not also
have been regarded as tainted by the same disability. That agriculture
afforded scope for a high degree of technical skill is a fact not missed
by Aristotle. He is at pains to point out[423] that this most fundamental
of industries is a source of profit if scientifically pursued, as well
as a means of bare subsistence. For the exchange[424] of products (such
as corn and wine) by barter soon arises, and offers great opportunities,
which are only increased to an injurious extent by the invention of a
metallic currency. Now the founder of the Peripatetic school was not
the man to ignore the principles of scientific farming, and the labour
of collecting details had for him no terrors. Accordingly he refers
to the knowledge[425] required in several departments of pastoral and
agricultural life. He sketches briefly the development of the industry,
from the mere gathering of nature’s bounty, through the stage of nomad
pasturage, to settled occupation and the raising of food-crops by tillage
of the soil. But in the _Politics_ he does not follow out this topic.
His preoccupation is the development of man in political life: so he
dismisses further detail with the remark[426] (referring to the natural
branch of χρηματιστική, the art of profit-making, which operates with
crops and beasts) that in matters of this kind speculation is liberal
(= worthy of a free man) but practice is not. This seems to imply that
to be engrossed in the detailed study of various soils or breeds of
beasts, with a view to their appropriate and profitable management,
is an illiberal and cramping pursuit. He does not apply to it the
term βαναυσία, and the reason probably is that the bodily defects of
the sedentary artisan are not found in the working farmer. But the
concentration upon mean details of no moral or political significance is
common to both. That all unskilled[427] wage-earners fall under the same
ban is a matter of course, hardly worth mentioning. In short, all those
who depend on the custom of others for a living are subject to a sort of
slavery in a greater or less degree, and unfit to be citizens.

The value attached to ‘self-sufficiency’ as evidence of freedom and of
not living ‘in relation to another’ (that is, in dependence[428] on
another,) is in striking contrast to views that have enjoyed a great
vogue in modern economic theory. Neither the man nor the state can be
completely[429] self-sufficing: that Aristotle, and Plato before him,
saw. Man, feeling his way upward through the household to the state,
needs help. He first finds[430] a helper (I am omitting the sex-union)
in the ox, the forerunner of the slave, and still in primitive rustic
life the helper of the poor. Growing needs bring division of labour and
exchange by barter, and so on. As a political animal he can never be
quite independent as an individual, but it is the law of his being that
the expanding needs which draw him into association with his fellows
result in making him more of a man. Here lies a pitfall. If through
progress in civilization his daily life becomes so entangled with those
of other men that his freedom of action is hampered thereby, surely
he has lost something. His progress has not been clear gain, and the
balance may not be easy to strike. It is therefore a problem, how to find
a position in which man may profit by the advantages of civilization
without risking the loss of more than he has gained. Aristotle does not
state it in terms so brutally frank. But the problem is there, and he
does in effect attempt a solution. The presence in sufficient numbers of
slaves legally unfree, and workers legally free but virtually under a
defined or special kind[431] of servitude (ἀφωρισμένην τινὰ δουλείαν), is
the only means by which a privileged class can get all the good that is
to be got out of human progress. His model citizens are an aristocracy
of merited privilege, so trained to virtue that to be governed by them
will doubtless enable their subjects to enjoy as much happiness as their
inferior natures can receive. This solution necessitates the maintenance
of slavery[432] as existing by nature, and the adoption of economic
views that have been rightly called reactionary. The student of human
nature and experience unwisely departed from the safer ground of his own
principles and offered a solution that was no solution at all.

As the individual man cannot live in complete isolation, supplying his
own needs and having no relations with other men,—for his manhood would
thus remain potential and never become actual—so it will be with the
state also. It must not merely allow aliens to reside in it and serve
its purposes internally: it will have to stand in some sort of relations
to other states. This is sufficiently asserted by the provision made for
the contingency of war. But in considering how far a naval force would be
required[433] in his model state he remarks ‘The scale of this force must
be determined by the part (τὸν βίον) played by our state: if it is to
lead a life of leadership and have dealings with other states (ἡγεμονικὸν
καὶ πολιτικὸν βίον), it will need to have at hand this force also on a
scale proportioned to its activities.’ Then, jealous ever of the Mean,
he goes on to deny the necessity of a great ‘nautical rabble,’ in fact
the nuisance of the Peiraeus referred to above. On the protection of such
maritime commerce as he would admit he does not directly insist; but,
knowing Athens so well, no doubt he had it in mind. Another illustration
of the virtuous Mean may be found in the rules of education. The
relations of the quarrelsome Greek states had been too often hostile. The
Spartan training had been too much admired. But it was too one-sided, too
much a glorification of brute force, and its inadequacy had been exposed
since Leuctra. Its success had been due to the fact that no other state
had specialized in preparation for war as Sparta had done. Once others
took up this war-policy in earnest, Sparta’s vantage was gone. This
vantage was her all. Beaten in war, she had no reserve of non-military
qualities to assuage defeat and aid a revival. The citizens of Utopia
must not be thus brutalized. Theirs must be the true man’s courage
(ἀνδρία)[434], as far removed from the reckless ferocity of the robber
or the savage as from cowardice. It is surely not too much to infer[435]
that military citizens of this character were meant to pursue a public
policy neither abject nor aggressive.

It is in connexion with bodily training that we come upon views that
throw much light on the position of agricultural labour. There is, he
remarks, a general agreement[436] that gymnastic exercises do promote
manly courage, or as he puts it below ‘health and prowess.’ But at the
present time there is, in states where the training of the young is
made a special object, a tendency[437] to overdo it: they bring up the
boys as regular athletes, producing a habit of body that hinders the
shapely development and growth of the frame. The Thebans in particular
are thought to be meant. His own system does not thus run to excess.
Gentle exercises gradually extended will develop fine bodies to match
fine souls. Now his labouring classes receive no bodily training of the
kind. The frame of the artisan is left to become cramped and warped by
the monotonous movements of his trade. So too the farm-labourer is left
to become hard and stiff-jointed. Neither will have the supple agility
needed for fighting as an art. We have seen that this line had already
been taken by Plato in the _Republic_; indeed it was one that a Greek
could hardly avoid. Yet the shock-tactics of heavy columns were already
revolutionizing Greek warfare as much as the light troops organized by
Iphicrates. Were Aristotle’s military principles not quite up to date?
Philip made the Macedonian rustic into a first-rate soldier. But the
northern tribesman was a free man. The rustic of the model state was to
be a slave or serf: therefore he could not be a soldier. To keep him in
due subjection he must not be allowed to have arms or trained to use them
skilfully. This policy is nothing more or less than the precautionary
device[438] resorted to in Crete; the device that he twits Plato with
omitting in the _Republic_, though without it his Guardians would not be
able to control the landholding Husbandmen. And yet the weakness of the
Cretan system is duly noted[439] in its place. The truth is, Aristotle
was no more exempt from the worship of certain ill-defined political
terms than were men of far less intellectual power. The democrat
worshipped ‘freedom’ in the sense[440] of ‘do as you please,’ the mark of
a freeborn citizen. The philosopher would not accept so crude a doctrine,
but he is none the less determined to mark off the ‘free’ from the
unfree, socially as well as politically. Adapting an institution known
in Thessalian[441] cities, he would have two open ‘places’ (ἀγοραί) in
his model state; one for marketing and ordinary daily business, the other
reserved for the free citizens. Into the latter no tradesman (βάναυσον)
or husbandman (γεωργόν), or other person of like status (τοιοῦτον), is to
intrude—unless the magistrates summon him to attend.

It is a pity that Aristotle has left us no estimate of the relative
numerical strength of the various classes of population in Utopia. He
neglects this important detail more completely even than Plato. Yet
I fancy that an attempt to frame such an estimate would very soon
have exposed the visionary and unpractical nature of the whole fabric
constructed on his lines. It would, I believe, have been ultimately
wrecked on the doctrine of the Mean. Restriction of commerce had to
be reconciled with financial strength, for he saw that wealth was
needed[442] for both peace and war. This εὐπορία could only arise from
savings, the accumulated surplus of industry. The labouring classes would
therefore have to provide not only their own sustenance etc and that of
their rulers, but a considerable surplus as well. This would probably
necessitate so numerous a labouring population that the citizens would
have enough to do in controlling them and keeping them to their work.
To increase the number of citizens would add to the unproductive[443]
mouths, and so on. Foreign war would throw everything out of gear, and
no hiring of mercenaries is suggested. It is the carrying to excess
of the principle of specialization that demands excess of ‘leisure,’
nothing less than the exemption of all citizens (all persons that count,
in short,) from manual toil. Yet it was one who well knew the political
merits of peasant farmers that was the author of this extravagant scheme
for basing upon a servile agriculture the entertainment of a hothouse
virtue.

The general effect produced by reviewing the evidence of Aristotle on
agriculture and the labour-question is that he was a witness of the
decay of the working-farmer class, and either could not or would not
propose any plan for reviving it. The rarity of the words αὐτουργὸς and
cognates is not to be wondered at in his works. They do not occur in
the _Politics_. The _Rhetoric_ furnishes two[444] passages. One refers
to the kinds of men especially liable to unfair treatment (ἀδικία)
because it is not worth their while to waste time on legal proceedings,
citing as instances aliens and αὐτουργοί. Rustics may be included, but
are not expressly mentioned. The other[445] refers to qualities that
men generally like and respect, as justice. ‘Popular opinion finds this
character in those who do not make their living out of others; that is,
who live of their own labour, for instance those who live by farming
(ἀπὸ γεωργίας), and, in other pursuits, those most of all who work with
their own hands.’ Here we have the working farmer expressly cited as a
type worthy of respect. But to single him out thus certainly does not
suggest that the type was a common one. The great Aristotelian index of
Bonitz supplies three[446] more passages, all from the little treatise
_de mundo_. They occur in a special context. God, as the cause that holds
together the universe, is not to be conceived as a power enduring the
toil of a self-working laborious animal (αὐτουργοῦ καὶ ἐπιπόνου ζῴου).
Nor must we suppose that God, seated aloft in heaven and influencing
all things more or less directly in proportion as they are near or far,
pervades and flits through the universe regardless of his dignity and
propriety to carry on the things of earth with his own hands (αὐτουργεῖ
τὰ ἐπὶ γῆς). The third passage is in a comparison, illustrating the
divine power by the Persian system, in which the Great King sitting on
his throne pervades and directs his vast empire through his ministering
agents. Such _a fortiori_ is the government of God.


XVIII. THE LATER ATTIC ORATORS.

It has already been remarked that no clear chronological line can be
drawn to divide this famous group into two sections, but that there
is nevertheless a real distinction between the period of hostility
to Persia and that in which fear of Macedon was the dominant theme.
The jealousies and disunion of the Greek states are the background of
both. Isocrates[447] had appealed in vain for Greek union as a means of
realizing Greek ambitions and satisfying Greek needs. Demosthenes, so far
as he did succeed in combining Greek forces to resist the encroachments
of Philip, succeeded too late. In the fifth century BC we see the Greek
states grouped under two great leading powers. The conflict of these
powers leaves one of them the unquestioned head of the Greek world.
The next half century witnessed the fall of Sparta, earned by gross
misgovernment, and the rise and relapse of Thebes. In the same period
Athens made another bid for maritime empire, but this second Alliance had
failed. Isolation of Greek states was now the rule, and the hopelessness
of any common policy consummated the weakness of exhaustion. At Athens
the old fervent patriotism was cooling down, as we learn from the
growing reluctance to make sacrifices in the country’s cause. Demos
was no longer imperial, and he was evidently adapting himself to a
humbler role. His political leaders had to secure his food-supply and
provide for his festivals, and this out of a sadly shrunken income. To
provide efficient fighting forces on land and sea was only possible by
appropriating the Festival fund (θεωρικόν), and the mob of Athens was
unwilling either to fight in person or to surrender its amusements in
order to hire mercenaries. Too often the result was that mercenaries,
hired but not paid, were left to pillage friend and foe alike for their
own support. The truth is, individualism was superseding old-fashioned
patriotism. The old simple views of life and duty had been weakened by
the questionings of many thinkers, and no new moral footing had yet
been found to compete with immediate personal interest. Athens was the
chief centre of this decline, for the intellectual and moral influences
promoting it were strongest there: but it was surely not confined to
Athens. The failure of Thebes after the death of Epaminondas was one of
many symptoms of decay. She had overthrown Sparta, but she could not
herself lead Greece: her utmost achievement was a fatal equilibrium of
weak states, of which the Macedonian was soon to take full advantage.
And everywhere, particularly in rural districts, the flower of the male
population was being drained away, enlisting in mercenary armies, lured
by the hope of gain and willing to escape the prospect of hard and dreary
lives at home. In short, each was for his own hand.

Such an age was not one to encourage the peaceful and patient toil of
agriculture. The great cities, above all Athens, needed cheap corn.
Their own farmers could not supply this, and so importation[448] was
by law favoured, and as far as possible inforced. Thus times of actual
dearth seldom occurred, and home-grown corn was seldom a paying crop.
Thrown back all the more on cultivation of the olive and vine the
products of which were available for export, the farmer needed time for
the development of his planted (πεφυτευμένη) land, and the waiting for
returns necessitated a larger capital. He was then exposed to risk of
greater damage in time of war. For his capital was irretrievably sunk
in his vineyard or oliveyard, and its destruction would take years
to repair—that is, more waiting and more capital. This was no novel
situation. But its effect in reducing the number of small peasant farmers
was probably now greater than ever. Not only were mercenary armies
relentless destroyers and robbers (having no fear of reprisals and no
conventional scruples to restrain them), but their example corrupted the
practice of citizen forces. Even if no fighting took place in this or
that neighbourhood, the local farmers[449] must expect to be ruined by
the mere presence of their own defenders. When we bear in mind the risks
of drought in some parts or floods in others, the occasional losses of
live stock, and other ordinary misfortunes, it is fair to imagine that
the farmer of land needed to be a man of substance, not liable to be
ruined by a single blow. And the sidelights thrown on the subject by the
indirect references in the orators are quite consistent with this view.

The loss of the Thracian Chersonese in the disasters of 405 BC had not
only dispossessed the Athenian settlers there, but made that region
a source of continual anxiety to Athens. She was no longer in secure
control of the strait through which the corn-ships passed from the
Pontus. A considerable revival of her naval power enabled her in 365 to
occupy the island of Samos and to regain a footing in the Chersonese.
To both of these cleruchs were sent. But the tenure of the Chersonese
was disputed by Thracian princes, and it was necessary to send frequent
expeditions thither. The success or failure of these enterprises is
recorded in histories of Greece. The importance of the position justified
great efforts to retain it. Greek cities on the Propontis and Bosporus,
not Thracian chiefs only, gave trouble. If short of supplies, as in 362,
they were tempted to lay hands[450] on the corn-ships, and consume what
was meant for Athens. But the result of much confused warfare was that in
358 the Chersonese became once more a part of the Athenian empire. Even
after the dissolution of that empire in the war with the Allies 358-6,
part of the peninsula still remained Athenian. But it was now exposed to
the menace of the growing power of Macedon under Philip. To induce the
Demos, who needed the corn, to provide prompt and adequate protection
for the gate of Pontic trade, was one of the many difficult tasks of
Demosthenes.

Demosthenes is by far the most important witness to the circumstances
of his age; though much allowance must be made for bias and partisan
necessities, this does not greatly affect references to agricultural
matters. Unfortunately his supreme reputation caused the works of other
authors to be attributed to him in later times. Thus the total number
of speeches passing under his name is a good deal larger than that of
the undoubtedly genuine ones. But, if we set aside a few mere forgeries
of later rhetoricians, the speeches composed by contemporary authors
are no less authorities for stray details of rural life than those of
Demosthenes himself. It is therefore not necessary to discuss questions
of authorship, on which even the ablest specialists are often not agreed.
But it is of interest to bear in mind that we are gleaning little items,
from a strictly Athenian point of view, bearing on the condition of
the same Athens and Attica as came under the cool observation of the
outsider Aristotle. The lives of Aristotle and Demosthenes, from 384-3
to 322 BC, are exactly contemporary. And, as in matters of politics the
speeches of the orators often illustrate the philosopher’s criticisms of
democracy, so it is probable that the matters of food-supply and rural
economy, referred to by speakers for purposes of the moment, were among
the particulars noted by Aristotle when forming his conclusions on those
subjects.

The right of owning real estate in Attica being reserved for Athenian
citizens, aliens were debarred from what was sometimes a convenient
form[451] of investment. If the possible return on capital so placed
was lower than in more speculative ventures, the risk of total loss was
certainly much less, of partial loss comparatively small. Moreover it
gave the owner a certain importance[452] as a citizen of known substance.
It enabled a rich man to vary[453] his investments, as references to
mixed estates shew. And he had a choice of policies in dealing with
it: he could reside on his own property and superintend the management
himself, or entrust the charge to a steward, or let it to a tenant. And,
if at any time he wanted ready money for some purpose, he could raise it
by a mortgage on favourable terms. If the land lay in a pleasant spot
not too far from the city, he was tempted to make himself a ‘place in
the country’ for his own occasional retirement and the entertainment of
friends. That landowning presented itself to Athenians of the Demosthenic
period in the aspects just sketched is manifest from the speeches
belonging to the years from 369 to 322 BC. Of the small working farmer
there is very little trace. But that some demand for farms existed seems
indicated by the cleruchs sent to the Chersonese and Samos. No doubt
these were meant to serve as resident garrisons at important points, and
it is not to be supposed that they were dependent solely on their own
labour for tillage of their lots. Another kind of land-hunger speaks for
itself. The wars and wastings of this period placed large areas of land
at the disposal of conquerors. Olynthian, Phocian, Boeotian territory was
at one time or another confiscated and granted out as reward for this
or that service. No reproaches of Demosthenes are more bitter than the
references to these cruel and cynical measures of Philip’s corrupting
policy. Individuals shared[454] these and other spoils: the estates of
Aeschines and Philocrates in Phocis, and later of Aeschines in Boeotia,
are held up as the shameful wages of treachery. These estates can only
have been worked by slave-labour under stewards, for politicians in
Athens could not reside abroad. They are specimens of the large-scale
agriculture to which the circumstances of the age were favourable.

A dispute arising out of a case of challenge to exchange properties[455]
(ἀντίδοσις), in order to decide which party was liable for performance
of burdensome state-services, gives us a glimpse of a large holding in
Attica. It belongs to 330 BC or later. The farm is an ἐσχατιά, that is
a holding near[456] the frontier. It is stated to have been more than
40 stadia (about 5 miles) in circuit. The farmstead included granaries
(οἰκήματα) for storing the barley and wheat which were evidently the
chief crops on this particular farm. It included also a considerable
vineyard producing a good quantity of wine. Among the by-products was
brushwood (ὕλη, not timber ξύλα)[457]. The faggots were carried to
market (Athens, I presume) on the backs of asses. The ass-drivers are
specially mentioned. The returns from the faggot-wood are stated at over
12 drachms a day. The challenging speaker declares that this estate
was wholly unencumbered: not a mortgage-post (ὅρος) was to be seen. He
contrasts his own position, a man who has lost most of his property in
a mining venture, though he has even toiled with his own[458] hands,
with that of the landlord (I presume not an αὐτουργός) enriched by the
late rise of the prices of corn and wine. He may be grossly exaggerating
the profits of this border-farm: his opponent would probably be able to
cite very different facts from years when the yield had been poor or
prices low. Still, to impress an Athenian jury, the picture drawn in
this speech must at least have seemed a possible one. The labour on the
farm would be mainly that of slaves: but to this I shall return below.
In another speech[459] we hear of a farmer in the far north, on the SE
Crimean coast. The sea-carriage of 80 jars of sour wine is accounted
for by his wanting it for his farm-hands (ἐργάται). Slaves are probably
meant, but we cannot be sure of it in that slave-exporting part of the
world. At any rate he was clearly farming on a large scale. If he was,
as I suppose, a Greek settler, the case is an interesting one. For it
would seem to confirm the view of Isocrates, that Greek expansion was a
feasible solution of a felt need, provided suitable territory for the
purpose could be acquired; and that of Xenophon, when he proposed to
plant necessitous Greeks in Asiatic lands taken from Persia.

The type of farmer known to us from Aristophanes, who works a holding
of moderate size, a man not wealthy but comfortable, a well-to-do
peasant proprietor who lives among the slaves whose labour he directs,
is hardly referred to directly in the speeches of this period.
Demosthenes[460] in 355 BC makes the general remark ‘You cannot deny
that farmers who live thrifty lives, and by reason of rearing children
and domestic expenses and other public services have fallen into arrear
with their property-tax, do the state less wrong than the rogues who
embezzle public funds.’ But he does not say that there were many such
worthy citizen-farmers, nor does he (I think) imply it. In a similar
passage[461] three years later he classes them with merchants, mining
speculators, and other men in businesses, as better citizens than the
corrupt politicians. Such references are far too indefinite, and too
dependent on the rhetorical needs of the moment, to tell us much. In one
of the earlier private speeches[462] Demosthenes deals with a dispute
of a kind probably common. It is a neighbours’ quarrel over a wall, a
watercourse, and right of way. To all appearance the farms interested
in the rights and wrongs were not large holdings. They were evidently
in a hilly district. The one to protect which from floods the offending
wall had been built had at one time belonged to a ‘town-bred[463] man’
who disliked the place, neglected it, and sold it to the father of
Demosthenes’ client. There is nothing to shew that this farm was the
whole of the present owner’s estate: so that it is hardly possible to
classify him economically with any exactitude. We do by chance learn that
he had a staff of slaves, and that vines and fig-trees grew on the land.

The author of one of the earlier speeches[464] (between 368 and 365
BC) furnishes much more detail in connexion with estates of what was
apparently a more ordinary type. Neighbours are quarrelling as usual,
and we have of course only _ex parte_ statements. The farms, worked by
slave-labour, produce vines and olives and probably some corn also. The
enclosure and tending of valuable plants is represented as kept up to a
high standard. Incidentally we learn that the staff used to contract[465]
for the gathering of fruit (ὀπώραν) or the reaping and carrying of
other crops (θέρος ἐκθερίσαι), clearly on other estates. The contract
was always made by a person named, who is thereby proved to have been
the real owner of these slaves,—a point in the case. According to his
own account, the speaker had for some time been settled (κατῴκουν) on
the estate. That is, he had a house there and would sometimes be in
residence. The amenities of the place are indicated by the mention of his
young rose-garden, which was ravaged by trespassers, as were his olives
and vines. The house from which they carried off ‘all the furniture,
worth more than 20 minas,’ seems to have been in Athens, and the mention
of the lodging-house (συνοικία) that he mortgaged for 16 minas shews that
his estate was a mixed one. Country houses were no exceptional thing. A
mining speculator speaks of an opponent[466] as coming to his house in
the country and intruding into the apartments of his wife and daughters.
A party protesting against being struck off the deme-register says[467]
that his enemies made a raid on his cottage in the country (οἰκίδιον ἐν
ἀγρῷ). He is probably depreciating the house, in order not to have the
dangerous appearance of a rich man.

We hear also of farms near Athens, the suburban position of which no
doubt enhanced their value. In the large mixed estate inherited and
wasted by Timarchus, =Aeschines=[468] mentions (344 BC) a farm only
about a mile and a half from the city wall. The spendthrift’s mother
entreated him to keep this property at least: her wish was to be buried
there. But even this he sold, for 2000 drachms (less than £80). In the
speech against Euergus and Mnesibulus the plaintiff tells[469] how his
opponents raided his farm and carried off 50 soft-wooled sheep at graze,
and with them the shepherd and all the belongings of the flock, also a
domestic slave, etc. This was not enough: they pushed on into the farm
and tried to capture the slaves, who fled and escaped. Then they turned
to the house, broke down the door that leads to the garden (κῆπον),
burst in upon his wife and children, and went off with all the furniture
that remained in the house. The speaker particularly points out[470]
that he had lived on the place from childhood, and that it was near the
race-course (πρὸς τῷ ἱπποδρόμῳ). It must then have been near Athens. The
details given suggest that it was a fancy-farm, devoted to the production
of stock valued for high quality and so commanding high prices. The
garden seems to be a feature of an establishment more elegant than that
of a mere peasant farmer. It corresponds to the rose-bed in a case
referred to above: =Hyperides=[471] too mentions a man who had a κῆπος
near the Academy, doubtless a pleasant spot. The farm in the plain (ὀ ἐν
πεδίῳ ἀγρός)[472] belonging to Timotheus, and mortgaged by him to meet
his debts, is only mentioned in passing (362 BC) with no details: we can
only suppose it to have been an average holding in the rich lowland.

A few passages require separate consideration in connexion with the
labour-question. In the speech on the Crown (330 BC) Demosthenes
quotes[473] Aeschines as protesting against being reproached with the
friendship (ξενίαν) of Alexander. He retorts ‘I am not so crazy as to
call you Philip’s ξένος or Alexander’s φίλος, unless one is to speak
of reapers or other wage-earners as the friends of those who hire them
... but on a former occasion I called you the hireling (μισθωτὸν) of
Philip, and I now call you the hireling of Alexander.’ Here the reaper
(θεριστής) is contemptuously referred to as a mere hireling. Such was
the common attitude towards poor freemen who lived by wage-earning
labour,—θῆτες in short. But is it clear that the μισθωτὸς is necessarily
a freeman? The passage cited above from an earlier speech makes it
doubtful. If a gang of slaves could contract to cut and carry a crop
(θέρος μισθοῖντο ἐκθερίσαι), their owner acting for them, surely they
were strictly μισθωτοὶ from the point of view of the farmer who hired
them. They were ἀνδράποδα μισθοφοροῦντα, to use the exact Greek phrase.
In the speech against Timotheus an even more notable passage[474] (362
BC) occurs. Speaking of some copper said to have been taken in pledge for
a debt, the speaker asks ‘Who were the persons that brought the copper to
my father’s house? Were they hired men (μισθωτοί), or slaves (οἰκέται)?’
Here, at first sight, we seem to have the hireling clearly marked off
as free. For the argument[475] proceeds ‘or which of my slave-household
(τῶν οἰκετῶν τῶν ἐμῶν) took delivery of the copper? If slaves brought
it, then the defendant ought to have handed them over (for torture): if
hired men, he should have demanded our slave who received and weighed
it.’ Strictly speaking, slaves, in status δοῦλοι, are οἰκέται[476] in
relation to their owner, of whose οἰκία they form a part. But if _A_ in a
transaction with _B_ employed some slaves whom he hired for the purpose
from _C_ (_C_ being in no way personally involved in the case), would not
these[477] be μισθωτοί, in the sense that they were not his own οἰκέται,
but procured by μισθὸς for the job? It is perhaps safer to assume that in
the case before us the hirelings meant by the speaker are freemen, but I
do not think it can be considered certain. Does not their exemption from
liability to torture prove it? I think not, unless we are to assume that
the slaves hired from a third person, not a party in the case, could be
legally put to question. That this was so, I can find no evidence, nor
is it probable. The regular practice was this: either a party offered
his slaves for examination under torture, or he did not. If he did not,
a challenge (πρόκλησις) was addressed to him by his opponent, demanding
their surrender for the purpose. But to demand the slaves of any owner,
not a party in the case, was a very different thing, and I cannot
discover the existence of any such right. I am not speaking of state
trials, in which the claims of the public safety might override private
interests, but of private cases, in which the issue lay between clearly
defined adversaries. In default of direct and unquestionable authority,
I cannot suppose that an Athenian slaveowner could be called upon to
surrender his property (even with compensation for any damage thereto)
for the purposes of a case in which he was not directly concerned.

Stray references to matters of land-tenure, such as the letting of sacred
lands[478] (τεμένη) belonging to a deme, are too little connected with
our subject to need further mention here. And a curious story[479] of
some hill-lands (ὄρη) in the district of Oropus, divided by lot among
the ten Tribes, apparently as tribal property, is very obscure. Such
allotments would probably be let to tenants. What is more interesting in
connexion with agriculture is the references to farming as a means of
getting a livelihood, few and slight though they are. Demosthenes[480]
in 349 BC tells the Assembly that their right policy is to attack
Philip on his own ground, not to mobilize and then await him in Attica:
such mobilization would be ruinous to ‘those of you who are engaged in
farming.’ The speech against Phaenippus[481] shews us an establishment
producing corn and wine and firewood and alleged to be doing very well
owing to the prices then ruling in the market. We have also indications
of the presence of dealers who bought up crops, no doubt to resell at
a profit. From the expressions[482] ὀπώραν πρίασθαι and ὀπωρώνης it
might seem that fruit-crops in particular were disposed of in this way.
Naturally a crop of this sort had to be gathered quickly, and a field
gang would be employed—slaves or freemen, according to circumstances. For
that in these days poverty was driving many a free citizen[483] to mean
and servile occupations for a livelihood, is not only a matter of certain
inference but directly affirmed by Demosthenes in 345 BC. Aeschines[484]
in 344 also denies that the practice of any trade to earn a bare living
was any political disqualification to a humble citizen of good repute.
From such poor freemen were no doubt drawn casual hands at critical
moments of farm life, analogues of the British hop-pickers[485]. But,
with every allowance for possible occasions of employing free labour,
particularly in special processes where servile apathy was plainly
injurious, the farm-picture in general as depicted in these speeches is
one of slave-labour. And this suggests to me a question in reference to
the disposal of Greek slaves. For the vast majority of slaves[486] in
Greece, whether urban or rustic, were certainly Barbarians of several
types for several purposes. The sale of the people of captured cities
had become quite an ordinary thing. Sparta had sinned thus in her day
of power, and the example was followed from time to time by others.
The cases of Olynthus in 348 BC and Thebes in 335 fall in the present
period. Aeschines mentions[487] some captives working chained in Philip’s
vineyard; but these can only have been few. The mass were sold, and a
large sum of money realized thereby. At Thebes the captives sold are said
to have numbered 30,000. What markets absorbed these unhappy victims? I
can only guess that many found their way to Carthage and Etruria.


XIX. THE MACEDONIAN PERIOD 322-146 BC.

The deficiency of contemporary evidence illustrating the agricultural
conditions of this troubled age in the Greek world makes it necessary
to combine the various scraps of information in a general sketch.
Hellas had now seen its best days. The break-up of the great empire of
Alexander did not restore to the little Greek states the freedom of
action which had been their pride and which had been a main influence
in keeping up their vitality. The outward and visible sign of their
failure was the impossibility of an independent foreign policy. The
kingdoms of Alexander’s Successors might rise and fall, but Greek states
could do little to affect the results. A new world was opened to Greek
enterprise in the East, and Greek mercenaries and Greek secretaries
traders and officials were carrying the Greek language and civilization
into wide lands ruled by Macedonian kings. But these were individuals,
attracted by the prospect of a gainful military or civil career. Either
they settled abroad, and drained Greece of some of her ablest sons; or
they returned home enriched, and formed an element of the population
contrasting painfully with those who had stayed behind. In either case
it seems certain that the movement tended to lower the standard of
efficiency and patriotism in their native states. Citizen armies became
more and more difficult to maintain. The influx of money no longer locked
up in Oriental treasuries only served to accentuate the old social
distinction[488] of Rich and Poor. Men who came back with fortunes meant
to enjoy themselves, and they did: the doings of the returned soldier
of fortune were proverbial, and a fruitful theme for comic poets. But
the spectacle of wanton luxury was more likely to lure enterprising
individuals into ventures abroad than to encourage patient industry at
home. And there is little doubt that such was the general result. The
less vigorous of the poor citizens remained, a servile mob, ever ready by
grovelling compliments to earn the bounties of kings.

Political decay and changes of social circumstance were accompanied by
new movements in the sphere of thought. It is generally observed that
in this period philosophy more and more appeals to the individual man,
regardless of whether he be a citizen or not. How far this movement arose
out of changed conditions may be open to difference of opinion: but, as
usual in human affairs, what began as an effect continued to operate as
a cause. The rapid spread of the Greek tongue and Greek civilization
eastwards, known as Hellenizing, was a powerful influence promoting
cosmopolitan views. Alien blood could no longer form an unsurmountable
barrier: the Barbarian who spoke Greek and followed Greek ways had
won a claim to recognition, as had already been foreseen by the mild
sincerity[489] of Isocrates. But these half-Greeks, some of them even of
mixed blood, were now very numerous. They competed with genuine Hellenes
at a time when the pride of the genuine Hellene was ebbing: even in
intellectual pursuits, in which the Hellene still claimed preeminence,
they were serious and eventually successful rivals. It is no wonder
that earlier questionings took new life, and that consciousness of
common humanity tended to modify old-established sentiment, even on such
subjects as the relation of master and slave. It was not merely that the
philosophic schools from different points of view, Cynic Cyrenaic Stoic
Epicurean, persistently regarded man as a mental and moral unit, whatever
his political or social condition might be. The fragments and echoes of
the later Comedy suffice to shew how frankly the slave could be presented
on the public stage as the equal, or more than equal, of his master.

The foundation of new cities by the Successor-kings was another influence
acting in the same direction. These were either royal capitals or
commercial centres, or both, like Alexandria. Others were important
from their situation as strategic posts, such as Lysimacheia by the
Hellespont or Demetrias commanding the Pagasaean gulf. Competing powers
could not afford to wait for gradual growth; so great efforts were made
to provide populations for the new cities without delay. Sometimes
multitudes were transplanted wholesale from older communities. In any
case no strict inquiry into the past condition of transplanted persons
can have taken place. In Sicily we know that Syracuse had become the one
great centre of what remained of Greek power in that island. But, what
with incorporation of foreign mercenaries and enfranchisement of slaves,
what with massacres of Greek citizens, the population of Syracuse was a
mongrel mob. Such, if in a less degree, were the populations of the new
cities of the kings. There was nothing national about them. In some, for
instance Alexandria, a rabble wavering between apathy and ferocity was a
subject of concern to the government. Others were more noted as centres
of industry: such were some of those in Asia Minor. But common to them
all was the condition, a momentous change from a Greek point of view, of
dependence. They were not states, with a policy of their own, but parts
of this or that kingdom. However little their overlord might interfere
with their internal affairs, still it was he, not they, that stood in
relation to the world outside. They were not independent: but as a rule
they were prosperous. In the new world of great state-units they filled
a necessary place, and beside them the remaining state-cities of the
older Greek world were for the most part decaying. These for their own
protection had to conform their policy to that of some greater power.
Patriotism had little material in which to find expression: apathy and
cosmopolitan sentiment were the inevitable result. Such was in particular
the case at Athens, which remained eminent as a centre of philosophic
speculation, attracting inquirers and students from all parts. But the
‘fierce democraty’ of her imperial days was a thing of the past, and she
lived upon her former glories and present subservience.

If academic distinction and cosmopolitanism went easily together,
commercial activity was hardly likely to foster jealous state-patriotism
of the old sort. The leading centre of commerce in the eastern
Mediterranean was Rhodes. The island city was still a state. Its
convenient position as a port of call on the main trade routes gave it
wealth. Its usefulness to merchants from all parts enabled it to play
off the kings against one another, and to enjoy thereby much freedom of
action. Its steady conservative government and its efficient navy made
it a welcome check on piracy in time of peace, and a valued ally in war.
It was also a considerable intellectual centre. No power was so closely
in touch with international questions generally, or so often employed as
umpire in disputes. Till an unfortunate blunder at the time of the war
with Perseus (168 BC) put an end to their old friendship with Rome, and
led to their humiliation, the wise policy of the Rhodians preserved their
independence and earned them general goodwill. But it was surely not in a
state thriving on trade and traffic that the old narrow Greek patriotism
could find a refuge. It is not necessary to refer to more cases in
particular. The main point of interest is that in this age of cities
and extensive maritime intercourse urban life was generally developing
and rural life shrinking. Now it had been, and still was, the case that
mixture of population normally took place in active cities, especially
in seaport towns. It was in quiet country towns and hamlets that native
purity of blood was most easily preserved.

If the general outline of circumstances has been fairly sketched in the
above paragraphs, we should expect to find that agriculture on a small
scale was not prospering in this period. Unhappily there is hardly any
direct evidence on the point. Even indirect evidence is meagre and
sometimes far from clear. One notable symptom of the age is seen in the
rise of bucolic poetry. This is not a rustic growth, the rude utterance
of unlettered herdsmen, but an artificial product of town-dwelling
poets, who idealize the open-air life to amuse town-bred readers
somewhat weary of the everlasting streets. In the endeavour to lend an
air of reality to scenes of rural life, it was convenient to credit
the rustics (shepherds goatherds etc) with a grossness of amorosity
that may perhaps be exaggerated to suit the taste of urban readers. Of
this tendency the idylls of Theocritus furnish many instances. We need
not accept them as accurate pictures of the life of herds and hinds in
Sicily or elsewhere, but they give us some notion of the ideas of rural
life entertained by literary men of the Alexandrian school. Beside the
guardians of flocks and herds with their faithful dogs, their flutes
and pan-pipes, idling in the pleasant shade and relieving the tiresome
hours with musical competition, we have the hinds ploughing mowing or
busy with vintage and winepress. Some are evidently freemen, others are
slaves; and we hear of overseers. There is milking and making of cheese,
and woodmen[490] are not forgotten. The bloom of flowers, the murmur of
streams, the song of birds, the whisper of the refreshing breeze, form
the setting of these rural scenes, and might almost persuade us that we
are privileged spectators of a genuine golden age. But the sayings and
doings of the rustics undeceive us. And the artificiality of this poetry
is further betrayed by that of the panegyric and pseudo-epic poems of
the same author. His admiration of Hiero[491] of Syracuse may be mainly
sincere, but his praises of Ptolemy[492] Philadelphus are the utterances
of a courtier. His excursions into the region of mythology are brief,
for the reading public of his day could not stand long epics on the
adventures[493] of Heracles or the Dioscuri. And the literary apparatus
is antiquarian, a more or less direct imitation of the old Homeric
diction, but unable to reproduce the varied cadences. It is generally
remarked that the genius of Theocritus finds its happiest and liveliest
expression in the fifteenth idyll, which depicts urban scenes. In this
respect that idyll may be compared with the mimes of =Herodas=, which
illustrate, probably with truth, the shadier sides of urban life in
cities of the period, which Theocritus ignores.

It is in a miniature epic[494] of mythological setting that we find
the most direct references to tillage of the soil combined with the
keeping of live stock—general agriculture, in short. We read of the
plowman[495] in charge of the crops, of the hard-working diggers[496]
(φυτοσκάφοι οἱ πολυεργοί), of the herdsmen[497], of an overseer[498] or
steward (αἰσυμνήτης). The staff seems to consist entirely of slaves. But
it is not easy to say how far the picture is meant as a reproduction
of the primitive labour-conditions of the traditional Heroic age, how
far the details may be coloured by the conditions of Theocritus’ own
day. In the Idylls we find a shepherd, free presumably, in charge of
a flock the property[499] of his father. On the other hand ἐριθακὶς
in one passage[500] seems not to be a wage-earner, but a black slave.
The ἐργάτης of the tenth idyll[501] is probably a free man, but he
is enamoured of a slave girl. No conclusion can be drawn from a
reference[502] to coarse but filling food meant for labourers. Roughness
and a certain squalor are conventional rustic attributes: a town-bred
girl repulses the advances of a herdsman[503] with the remark ‘I’m not
used to kiss rustics, but to press town-bred lips,’ and adds further
detail. Nor is the mention of Thessalian[504] serfs (πενέσται) in the
panegyric of Hiero anything more than a part of the poet’s apparatus.
And the reference[505] to the visit of Augeas to his estate, followed
by a comment on the value of the master’s personal attention to his
own interests, is a touch of truism common to all peoples in every
age. To Theocritus, the one poet of learned Alexandria who had high
poetic genius, the life and labour of farmers was evidently a matter of
little or no concern. He could hardly idealize the Egyptian fellah. And
the one passage[506] in which he directly illustrates the position of
the Greek contemporary farmer is significant. Discontented owing to a
disappointment in love, the man is encouraged by his friend to enter the
service of the generous Ptolemy as a mercenary soldier.

One or two small references may be gleaned from the _Characters_ of
Aristotle’s successor =Theophrastus=. That the bulk of these typical
portraits are drawn from town-folk is only to be expected, but this
point is not to be pressed overmuch, for philosophers did not frequent
country districts. The general references to treatment of slaves, the
slave-market, and so forth, are merely interesting as illustrative of
the general prevalence of slavery, chiefly of course in Athens. But we
do get to the farm in the case[507] of the rustic boor (ἄγροικος). His
lack of dignity and proper reserve is shewn in talking to his slaves on
matters of importance: he makes confidants of them, and so far forgets
himself as to lend a hand in grinding the corn. It has been remarked that
Greek manners allowed a certain familiarity[508] in the relations of
master and slave. But this person overdoes it: in Peripatetic language,
he transgresses the doctrine of the Mean. He employs also hired men
(μισθωτοί), and to them he recounts all the political gossip (τὰ ἀπὸ τῆς
ἐκκλησίας), evidently a sign of his awkwardness and inability to hold
his tongue. I take these wage-earners to be poor freemen. They might
be slaves hired from another owner: this practice appears elsewhere in
connexion with town slaves. But the general impoverishment of the old
Greece, save in a few districts, is beyond doubt: and the demand for
slaves in new cities would raise the price of slaves and tend to drive
the free poor to manual labour.

The exact dates of the birth and death of =Polybius= are uncertain, but
as an observer of events his range extended from about 190 or 189 to 122
or 121 BC. Though his references to agriculture are few and separately
of small importance, they have a cumulative value on certain points. He
wrote as historian of the fortunes of the civilized world of his day,
treated as a whole, in which a series of interconnected struggles led up
to the supremacy of Rome. His Greece is the Greece of the Leagues. No
leading state of the old models had been able to unite the old Hellas
effectively under its headship, but the Macedonian conquest had plainly
proved that in isolation[509] the little separate states had no future
open to them but slavery. The doings of Alexander’s Successors further
inforced the lesson. It was clear that the only hope of freedom lay in
union so far as possible, for thus only could Greek powers be created
able to act with any sort of independence and self-respect in their
relations with the new great powers outside. Accordingly there took
place a revival of old local unions in districts where a community of
interest between tribes or cities had in some form or other long been
recognized. Such were the tribal League of Aetolia and the city League of
Achaia. But these two were but notable instances of a federative movement
much wider. The attempt to unite the scattered towns of Arcadia, with a
federal centre at Megalopolis, seems to have been less successful. But
the general aim of the movement towards federalism in Greece is clear.
That it did not in the end save Greek freedom was due to two defects: it
was too partial and too late. For no general union was achieved. Greek
jealousy remained, and Leagues fought with Leagues in internal strife:
then they were drawn into quarrels not their own, as allies of great
foreign powers. It was no longer possible to remain neutral with safety.
No League was strong enough to face the risk of compromising itself with
a victorious great power. Achaean statesmen did their best, but they too
could not save their country from ruin, once the League became entangled
in the diplomacy of Rome. Nor was it the old Hellas alone that thus
drifted to its doom. Between Rome and Carthage the western Greeks lost
whatever power and freedom their own disunion and quarrels had left them.
The Rhodian republic and its maritime League of islanders had to become
the subject allies of Rome.

One point stands out clearly enough. In the Greece of the third century
BC the question of food-supply was as pressing as it had ever been in the
past. The operations of King Philip were often conditioned by the ease or
difficulty of getting supplies[510] of corn for his troops: that is, he
had to work on an insufficient margin of such resources. In 219, after
driving the Dardani out of Macedonia, he had to dismiss his men[511] that
they might get in their harvest. In 218, the success of his Peloponnesian
campaign was largely dependent[512] on the supplies and booty captured in
Elis, in Cephallenia, in Laconia; and on the subsidies of corn and money
voted by his Achaean allies. The destruction of crops[513] was as of old
a principal means of warfare. And when he had to meet the Roman invasion
in 197, the race to secure what corn[514] was to be had was again a
leading feature of the war. It is true that the feeding of armies was a
difficulty elsewhere[515], as in Asia, and in all ages and countries:
also that difficulties of transport were a considerable part of it. But
the war-indemnities[516] fixed by treaties, including great quantities of
corn, shew the extreme importance attached to this item. And the gifts
of corn[517] to the Rhodian republic after the great earthquake (about
225 BC), and the leave granted them[518] in 169 by the Roman Senate to
import a large quantity from Sicily, tell the same story. Another article
in great demand, only to be got wholesale from certain countries, such
as Macedonia, was timber. It was wanted for domestic purposes and for
construction of military engines, which were greatly developed in the
wars of the Successors; but above all for shipbuilding, commercial and
naval. Rhodes in particular[519] needed a great supply; and the gifts
of her friends in 224 BC were largely in the form of timber. There was
no doubt a great demand for it at Alexandria, Syracuse, Corinth, and
generally in seaport towns. It is evident that in strictly Greek lands
the wood grown was chiefly of small size, suitable for fuel. There is
no sign of an advance on the conditions of an earlier time in the way of
afforestation: nor indeed was such a policy likely.

But food had to be found somehow. Agriculture therefore had to go on.
Outside the commercial centres, where food-stuffs could be imported
by sea, there was no alternative: the population had to depend on the
products of local tillage and pasturage. A few cities celebrated as
art-centres might contrive to live by the sale of their works, but this
hardly affects the general situation. We should therefore very much like
to know how things stood on the land. Was the tendency towards large
landed estates, or was the small-farm system reviving? Was farm-labour
chiefly that of freemen, or that of slaves? If of freemen, was it
chiefly that of small owners, or that of wage-earners? In default of any
authoritative statement, we have to draw what inferences we can from
slight casual indications. That the career of Alexander was directly and
indirectly the cause of great disturbances in Greek life, is certain.
Of the ways in which it operated, two are of special importance.
The compulsory restoration of exiles[520] whose properties had been
confiscated led to claims for restitution; and in the matter of real
estate the particular land in question was easily identified and made the
subject of a bitter contest. Now uncertainty of tenure is notoriously
a check on improvement, and the effect of the restorations was to make
tenures uncertain. At the same time the prospects of professional
soldiering in the East were a strong temptation to able-bodied husbandmen
who were not very prosperous. From the rural parts of Greece a swarm of
mercenaries went forth to join the host of Alexander, and the movement
continued long. In the stead of one Alexander, there arose the rival
Successor-kings, who competed in the military market for the intelligent
Greeks. It was worth their while, and they paid well for a good article.
So all through the third century there was a draining away of some of the
best blood of Greece. Some of these men had no doubt parted with farms
before setting out on the great venture. Of those who survived the wars,
some settled down abroad as favoured citizens in some of the new cities
founded by the kings. The few who returned to Greece with money saved
did not come home to labour on a small farm: they settled in some city
where they could see life and enjoy the ministrations of male and female
slaves. Now it is not likely that all lands disposed of by these men were
taken up by husbandmen exposed to the same temptations. Probably the
greater part were bought up by the wealthier residents at home, and so
went to increase large holdings.

How far do stray notices bear out this conclusion? At Athens in 322
BC a constitution was imposed by Antipater, deliberately framed for
the purpose of placing power in the hands of the richer classes. He
left 9000 citizens in possession of the full franchise, excluding
12000 poor. For the latter he offered to provide allotments of land in
Thrace. Accounts[521] vary, but it seems that some accepted the offer
and emigrated. It was not a compulsory deportation, but it was exile.
Economically it may have been a relief to Athens by reducing the number
of citizens who shared civic perquisites. But it had no tendency to bring
more citizens back on to Attic land: such a move would have implied
displacement of present landholders, whom it was Antipater’s policy to
conciliate. In the course of the third century we get a glimpse of the
agrarian situation at Sparta. It is clear that the movement, already
noted by Aristotle, towards land-monopoly[522] in the hands of a few
rich, had been steadily going on. It ended by provoking a communistic
reaction under the reforming kings Agis IV and Cleomenes III. Blood
was shed, and Sparta became a disorderly state, the cause of many
troubles in Greece down to the time of the Roman conquest. The growing
Achaean League, in the side of which revolutionary Sparta was a thorn,
was essentially a conservative federation. However democratic its
individual members might be, the constitution of the League worked[523]
very effectively in the interest of the rich. On the occasion of the
capture of Megalopolis by Cleomenes =Polybius= is at pains to warn his
readers[524] against believing stories of the immense booty taken there.
Though the Peloponnese had enjoyed a period of prosperity, still these
stories are gross exaggerations. Megalopolis, an important member of
the League, had been from the first laid out on too ambitious[525] a
scale. That the ‘Great City’ was a great desert, had found proverbial
expression in a verse. A little later, when Philip was campaigning in
Peloponnesus, we hear of the great prosperity[526] of Elis, especially in
agriculture. The Eleans had enjoyed a great advantage in the protection
afforded them by religion as guardians of Olympia. We may add that they
were allied with the Aetolian League, whose hostility other Greek states
were not forward to provoke. A class of wealthy resident landlords
existed in Elis, and much of the country was good farming land under
tillage. But in most of the Achaean and Arcadian[527] districts pastoral
industry, and therefore sparse population, was the rule, owing to the
mountainous nature of those parts. In central Greece we need only refer
to the restored Thebes, centre once more of a Boeotian confederacy. The
fertile lowland of Boeotia supplied plenty of victual; and among Greek
delicacies the eels of the lake Copais were famous. Boeotians were known
as a well-nourished folk. In the fragments of the comic poet Eubulus[528]
(assigned to the fourth century BC) we have them depicted as gluttonous,
with some grossness of detail. Such being their tradition, I can see
nothing strange in the picture[529] given of the Boeotians in his own
day by =Polybius=. The ceaseless guzzling, the idleness and political
corruption of the people, may be overdrawn. I admit that such qualities
were not favourable to lasting prosperity; but their prosperity was not
lasting. In the view of Polybius the subjection of Greece by the Romans
was rather an effect than a cause of Greek degeneracy, and I dare not
contradict him. Moreover a piece of confirmatory evidence relative to
the third century BC occurs in a fragment of =Heraclides Ponticus=. In
a traveller’s description[530] of Greece Boeotia is thus referred to.
Round Tanagra the land is not very rich in corn-crops, but stands at
the head of Boeotian wine-production. The people are well-to-do, but
live simply: they are all farmers (γεωργοί), not labourers (ἐργάται). At
Anthedon on the coast the people are all fishermen ferrymen etc: they do
not cultivate the land, indeed they have none. Of Thebes he remarks that
the territory is good for horse-breeding, a green well-watered rolling
country, with more gardens than any other Greek city owns. But, he adds,
the people are violent undisciplined and quarrelsome. I think we may see
here an earlier stage in the degeneracy that disgusted Polybius.

In all this there is nothing to suggest that small farming was common and
prosperous during the Macedonian period in Greece. The natural, inference
is rather that agriculture in certain favoured districts was carried
on by a limited number of large landowners on a large scale, pastoral
industry varying locally according to circumstances. The development of
urban life and luxury, and the agrarian troubles in the Peloponnese, are
both characteristic phenomena of the age. In town and country alike the
vital fact of civilization was the conflict of interests between rich
and poor. Macedonia presents a contrast. There no great cities drew the
people away from the country. A hardy and numerous population supplied
the material for national armies whenever needed, and loyalty to the
reigning king gave unity to national action. Hence the long domination of
Macedon in Greece; the only serious opposition being that of the Aetolian
League. Of all the Successor-kingdoms, Macedon alone was able to make any
stand against the advance of Rome.

It remains to consider the few indications—I can hardly call them
references—from which we can get a little light on the labour-question.
The passages cited from Theophrastus and Theocritus point to the
prevalence of slave-labour. And the same may be said of =Polybius=. In
speaking[531] of the blunder in exaggerating the value of the booty
taken at Megalopolis, he says ‘Why, even in these more peaceful and
prosperous days you could not raise so great a sum of money in all the
Peloponnese out of the mere movables (ἐπίπλων) unless you took slaves
into account (χωρὶς σωμάτων).’ His word for live-stock not human is
θρέμματα. Evidently to him slave-property is a large item in the value
of estates. Again, speaking of the importance of Byzantium[532] on the
Pontic trade-route, he insists on the plentiful and useful supply of
bestial and human stock to Greece by this traffic. The high farming of
rural Elis[533] is shewn in its being full of σώματα and farm-stock
(κατασκευῆς). Hence these ‘bodies’ formed a considerable part of the
booty taken there by Philip. And in the claims[534] made at Rome in 183
BC against Philip a part related to slave-property. References to the
sale of prisoners of war, to piracy and kidnapping, are frequent: but
they only concern us as indicating time-honoured means of supplying the
slave-market. As for rowing ships, so for heavy farm-work, able-bodied
men were wanted. At a pinch such slaves could be, and were, employed
in war[535], with grant or promise of manumission: but this was a step
only taken in the last resort. A curious remark[536] of =Polybius= when
speaking of Arcadia must not be overlooked. In 220 BC an Aetolian force
invaded Achaia and penetrated into northern Arcadia, where they took
the border town of Cynaetha, and after wholesale massacre and pillage
burnt it on their retreat. The city had for years suffered terribly
from internal strife, in which the doings of restored exiles had played
a great part. Polybius says that the Cynaethans were thought to have
deserved the disaster that had now fallen upon them. Why? Because of
their savagery (ἀγριότητος). They were Arcadians. The Arcadians as a
race-unit (ἔθνος) enjoy a reputation for virtue throughout Greece,
as a kindly hospitable and religious folk. But the Cynaethans outdid
all Greeks in cruelty and lawlessness. This is to be traced to their
neglect of the time-honoured Arcadian tradition, the general practice
of vocal and instrumental music. This practice was deliberately adopted
as a refining agency, to relieve and temper the roughness and harshness
incidental to men living toilsome lives in an inclement climate. Such was
the design of the old Arcadians, on consideration of the circumstances,
one point in which was that their people generally worked in person (τὴν
ἑκάστων αὐτουργίαν). On this I need only remark that he is referring to
the past, but may or may not include the Arcadians of his own day: and
repeat what I have said before, that to be αὐτουργὸς does not exclude
employment of slaves as well. That there was still more personal labour
in rural Arcadia than in many other parts of Greece, is probable. But
that is all.

That the slavery-question was a matter of some interest in Greece may be
inferred from the pains taken by =Polybius=[537] to refute an assertion
of =Timaeus=, that to acquire slaves was not a Greek custom. The context
is lost, and we cannot tell whether it was a general assertion or not. If
general, it was no doubt nonsense. A more effective piece of evidence is
the report[538] of =Megasthenes=, who visited India early in the third
century. He told his Greek readers that in India slavery was unknown.
The contrast to Greece was of course the interesting point. It is also
affirmed[539] that in this period manumissions became more common, as
a result of the economic decline of Greece combined with the moral
evolution to be traced in the philosophic schools. Calderini, from whom
I take this, is the leading authority on Greek manumission. And, so far
as the records are concerned, the number of inscribed ‘acts’ recovered
from the important centre of Delphi[540] confirms the assertion. From
201 to 140 BC these documents are exceptionally numerous. But the not
unfrequent stipulation found in them, that the freed man or woman shall
remain in attendance[541] on his or her late owner for the owner’s life
or for some fixed period, or shall continue to practise a trade (or even
learn a trade) on the profits of which the late owner or his heirs shall
have a claim, suggest strongly that these manumissions were the rewards
of domestic service or technical skill. I do not believe that they have
any connexion with rustic[542] slavery. Calderini also holds that as
Greek industries and commerce declined free labour competed more and
more with slave-labour. So far as urban trades are concerned, this is
probably true: and likewise a certain decline in domestic slavery due to
the straitened circumstances of families and experience of the waste and
nuisance of large slave-households. This last point, already noticed[543]
e.g. by Aristotle, is to be found expressed in utterances of the comic
poets. Rustic slavery appears in the fragments of Menander’s Γεωργός, but
the old farmer’s slaves are Barbarians, who will do nothing to help him
when accidentally hurt, and who are hardly likely to receive favours.
The ordinary view of agriculture in Menander’s time seems most truly
expressed in his saying[544] that it is a slave’s business.

Mention of the comic poets may remind us that most of the surviving
matter of the later Comedy has reached us in the Latin versions and
adaptations of =Plautus= and =Terence=. It is necessary to speak of their
evidence separately, in particular where slavery is in question, for the
relative passages are liable to be touched with Roman colouring. In the
case of manumission this is especially clear, but to pursue the topic in
detail is beyond my present purpose. The passages of =Plautus= bearing
on rustic life are not many, but the picture so far as it goes is clear
and consistent. In general the master is represented as a man of means
with a house in town and a country estate outside. The latter is worked
by slaves under a slave-bailiff or steward (_vilicus_). The town-house is
staffed by slaves, but the headman is less absolute than the steward on
the farm: departmental chiefs, such as the cook, are important parts of
the household. This is natural enough, for the master generally resides
there himself, and only pays occasional[545] visits to the farm. The two
sets of slaves are kept apart. If the steward[546] or some other trusted
farm-slave has to come to town, he is practically a stranger, and a
quarrel is apt to arise with leading domestics: for his rustic appearance
and manners are despised by the pampered menials. But he is aware that
his turn may come: some day the master in wrath may consign the offending
town-slave to farm-labour, and then—. Apart from slavery, rustic life
is regarded[547] as favourable to good morals: honest labour, frugal
habits, freedom from urban temptations, commend it to fathers who desire
to preserve their sons from corrupting debauchery. In short, the urban
moralist idealizes the farm. Whether he would by choice reside there, is
quite another thing. Clearly the average young citizen would not. That
the farm is occasionally used[548] as a retreat, is no more than a point
of dramatic convenience. In one passage[549] we have a picture of a small
farm, with slave-labour employed on it. Freemen as agricultural labourers
hardly appear at all. But a significant dialogue[550] between an old
freeman and a young one runs thus: ‘Country life is a life of toil.’
‘Aye, but city indigence is far more so.’ The youth, who has offered to
do farm-work, is representative of that class of urban poor, whose lot
was doubtless a very miserable one. Very seldom do we hear anything of
them, for our records in general only take account of the master and the
slave. In the play just referred to[551] there occur certain terms more
or less technical. The neutral _operarius_ seems equivalent to ἐργάτης,
and _mercennarius_ to μισθωτός, distinct from[552] _servus_. But these
terms are not specially connected with agriculture.

The references in =Terence= give us the same picture. An old man of 60
or more is blamed[553] by a friend. ‘You have a first-rate farm and a
number of slaves: why will you persist in working yourself to make up
for their laziness? Your labour would be better spent in keeping them
to their tasks.’ The old man explains[554] that he is punishing himself
for his treatment of his only son. In order to detach the youth from
an undesirable amour, he had used the stock reproaches of fathers to
erring sons. He had said ‘At your time of life I wasn’t hanging about a
mistress: I went soldiering in Asia for a living, and there I won both
money and glory.’ At length the young man could stand it no longer: he
went off to Asia and entered the service of one of the kings. The old
man cannot forgive himself, and is now busy tormenting himself for his
conduct. He has sold off[555] all his slaves, male or female, save those
whose labour on the farm pays for its cost, and is wearing himself out
as a mere farm hand. Another[556] old farmer, a man of small means who
makes his living by farming, is evidently not the owner but a tenant.
Another[557] has gone to reside on his farm, to make it pay; otherwise
the expenses at home cannot be met. In general country life is held up as
a model[558] of frugality and industry. In one passage[559] we hear of
a hired wage-earner employed on a farm (_a villa mercennarium_) whom I
take to be a free man, probably employed for some special service. Such
are the gleanings to be got from these Roman echoes of the later Attic
comedy. I see no reason to believe that they are modified by intrusion of
details drawn from Italy. The period in which Plautus and Terence wrote
(about 230-160 BC) included many changes in Roman life, particularly
in agriculture. In large parts of Italy the peasant farmers were being
superseded by great landlords whose estates were worked by slave-labour,
and the conditions of farm life as shewn by the Attic playwrights were
not so strange to a Roman audience as to need recasting. And we can only
remark that the evidence drawn from the passages above referred to is in
full agreement with that taken from other sources.

A very interesting sidelight on conditions in Greece, agriculture
included, towards the end of the third century BC, is thrown by the
correspondence[560] of =Philip V of Macedon= with the authorities of
Larisa. An inscription found at Larisa preserves this important record.
Two points must first be noted, to give the historical setting of the
whole affair. Thessaly was under Macedonian overlordship, and its
economic and military strength a matter of concern to Philip, who had
succeeded to the throne of Macedon in 220 BC. Moreover, the defeat of
Carthage in the first Punic war (264-41), the Roman occupation of the
greater part of Sicily and Sardinia, the Gallic wars and extension of
Roman dominion in Italy, the Illyrian war (230-29) and intervention
of Rome beyond the Adriatic, had attracted the attention of all the
Greek powers. The western Republic had for some years been carefully
watched, and the admission of Corcyra Epidamnus and Apollonia to the
Roman alliance was especially disquieting to the Macedonian king. So
in 219 BC, just before the second Punic war, Philip sent =a letter
to Larisa=, pointing out that the number of their citizens had been
reduced by losses in recent wars and urging them to include in their
franchise the Thessalians and other Greeks resident in the city. Among
other advantages, the country[561] would be more fully cultivated. The
Larisaeans obeyed his injunctions. In 217 the war in Greece was ended by
his concluding peace with the Aetolians, his chief antagonists. Hannibal
was now in Italy, and the victory of Cannae in 216 raised hopes in Philip
of using the disasters of the Romans to drive them out of Illyria. In
215 he concluded an alliance with Hannibal. The Romans replied by naval
activity in the Adriatic and later by stirring up Greek powers, above
all the Aetolians, to renew the war against him. Meanwhile things had
not gone on quietly at Larisa. The old Thessalian noble families had
given way to the king’s pressure unwillingly for the moment, but internal
troubles soon broke out. The nobles regained control and annulled the
recent concessions. Philip therefore addressed to them a =second letter=
in 214, censuring their conduct, and calling upon them to give effect to
the enfranchisement-policy previously agreed to. Thus they would not only
conform to his decision as their overlord, but would best serve their
own interests. Their city would gain strength by increasing the number
of citizens, and they would not have their territory disgracefully[562]
lying waste (καὶ τὴν χώραν μὴ ὥσπερ νῦν αἰσχρῶς χερσεύεσθαι). He went on
to refer to the advantageous results of such incorporations elsewhere:
citing in particular the experience of Rome, whose growth and colonial
expansion were the fruits of a franchise-policy so generous as to grant
citizenship even to manumitted slaves. He called upon the Larisaeans to
face the question without aristocratic prejudice (ἀφιλοτίμως). And the
Larisaeans again complied.

Now here we have a glimpse of agricultural decline in one of the most
fertile parts of Greece. The stress laid upon it by Philip shews that
to him it seemed a very serious matter. He saw trouble coming, and
wished to keep his dependent allies strong. That his difficulty lay
in controlling the aristocratic families, who still retained much
of their former power, is clear. After his defeat in 197 the Romans
restored[563] the aristocratic governments in Thessalian cities; indeed
all through the wars of this period in Greece the popular parties
inclined to Macedon, while the propertied classes favoured Rome. In
Thessaly the private estates of the nobles were cultivated by serfs.
How would an incorporation of more citizens tend to promote a fuller
cultivation of the land? I think we may take it for granted that the new
citizens were not expected to till the soil in person. That they were
to have unemployed serfs assigned to them, and so to enter the ranks of
cultivating landlords, is a bold assumption: for we do not know that
there were any unemployed serfs or that any distribution of land was
contemplated. I can only suggest that the effect of receiving citizenship
would be to acquire the right of holding real estate. Then, if we
suppose that there were at the time landed estates left vacant by the
war-casualties to which the king refers, and that each of these carried
with it a right to a certain supply of serf labour, we do get some sort
of answer to the question. But so far as I know this is nothing but
guesswork. More owners interested in the profits of farming would tend,
if labour were available, to employ more labour on the farms. In short,
we have evidence of the decay of agriculture in a particular district and
period, but as to the exact causes of this decay, and the exact nature of
the means proposed for checking it, we are sadly in the dark.

The garden or orchard had always been a favourite institution in Greek
life, and the growth of cities did not make it less popular. The land
immediately beyond the city walls was often laid out in this manner.
When Aratus in 251 BC took Sicyon and attached it to the Achaean League,
the surprise was effected by way of a suburban[564] garden. And we have
no reason to suppose that holdings near a city lacked cultivators.
Even in the horrible period of confusion and bloodshed at Syracuse,
from the death of Dionysius the elder to the victory of Timoleon, we
hear[565] of Syracusans living in the country, and of the usual clamour
for redistribution of lands. In the endeavour to repopulate the city an
invitation to settlers was issued, with offer[566] of land-allotments,
and apparently the promise was kept. These notices suggest that there
was a demand for suburban holdings, but tell us nothing as to the
state of things in the districts further afield, or as to the class of
labour employed on the land. In any case Syracuse was a seaport, and
accustomed to get a good part of its supplies by sea. Very different was
the situation in Peloponnesus, where the up-country towns had to depend
chiefly on the produce of their own territories. There land-hunger was
ever present. The estates of men driven out in civil broils were seized
by the victorious party, and restoration of exiles at once led to a
fresh conflict over claims to restitution of estates. One of the most
difficult problems[567] with which Aratus had to deal at Sicyon was this;
and in the end he only solved it by the use of a large sum of money, the
gift of Ptolemy Philadelphus. The restored exiles on this occasion are
said to have been not less than 580 in all. They had been expelled by
tyrants who had in recent years ruled the city, and whose policy it had
evidently been to drive out the men of property—sworn foes of tyrants—and
to reward their own adherents out of confiscated lands. To reverse this
policy was the lifelong aim of Aratus. In the generation following, the
life of his successor Philopoemen gives us a little light on agriculture
from another point of view, that of the soldier. He was resolved to make
the army of the Achaean League an efficient force. As a young man he
concluded[568] that the Greek athletic training was not consistent with
military life, in which the endurance of hardship and ability to subsist
on any diet were primary necessities. Therefore he devoted his spare time
to agriculture, working[569] in person on his farm, about 2½ miles from
Megalopolis, sharing the labour and habits of the labourers (ἐργατῶν).
The use of the neutral word leaves a doubt as to whether freemen or
slaves are meant: taken in connexion with the passages cited from
Polybius, it is perhaps more likely that the reference is to slaves. But
the chief interest of the story as preserved by =Plutarch= lies in the
discovery that, compared with athletes, husbandmen are better military
material.

The conclusions of Beloch[570] as to the population of Peloponnesus in
this period call for serious consideration. His opinion is that the
number capable of bearing arms declined somewhat since the middle of the
fourth century, though the wholesale emancipation of Spartan Helots must
be reckoned as an addition. But on the whole the free population was
at the beginning of the second century about equal to the joint total
of free and Helot population at the end of the fifth century. On the
other hand, the slave population had in the interval greatly increased.
He points to the importance of a slave corps[571] in the defence of
Megalopolis when besieged in 318 BC: to the Roman and Italian[572] slaves
(prisoners sold by Hannibal) in Achaean territory, found and released
in 194 BC, some 1200 in number: and to the levy[573] of manumitted
home-born slaves in the last struggle of the League against Rome. I must
say that this evidence, taken by itself, hardly seems enough to sustain
the great historian’s broad conclusion. But many of the passages cited
in preceding sections lend it support, and I am therefore not disposed
to challenge its general probability. It may be added that increase in
the number of slaves suggests an increase of large holdings cultivated
by slave labour; and that the breeding of home-born (οἰκογενεῖς) slaves
could be more easily practised by owners of a large staff than on a small
scale. Moreover the loss of slaves levied for war purposes would fall
chiefly on their wealthy owners. The men of property were rightly or
wrongly suspected of leaning to Rome, and were not likely to be spared by
the demagogues who presided over the last frantic efforts of ‘freedom’
in Greece. The truth seems to be that circumstances were more and more
unfavourable to the existence of free husbandmen on small farms, the very
class of whose solid merits statesmen and philosophers had shewn warm
appreciation. The division between the Rich, who wanted to keep what they
had and get more, and the Poor, who wanted to take the property of the
Rich, was the one ever-significant fact. And the establishment of Roman
supremacy settled the question for centuries to come. Roman capitalism,
hastening to exploit the world for its own ends, had no mercy for the
small independent worker in any department of life. In Greece under the
sway of Rome there is no doubt that free population declined, and the
state of agriculture went from bad to worse.

At this point, when the Greek world passes under the sway of Rome, it is
necessary to pause and turn back to consider the fragmentary record of
early Italian agriculture. This one great staple industry is represented
as the economic foundation of Roman political and military greatness.
No small part of the surviving Latin literature glorifies the soundness
of the Roman farmer-folk and the exploits of farmer-heroes in the good
old days, and laments the rottenness that attended their decay. How far
this tradition is to be accepted as it stands, or what reservations on
its acceptance should be made, and in particular the introduction or
extension of slave-labour, are the questions with which it will be our
main business to deal.




ROME—EARLY PERIOD


XX. THE TRADITIONS COMBINED AND DISCUSSED.

When we turn to Roman agriculture, and agricultural labour in particular,
we have to deal with evidence very different in character from that
presented by the Greek world. This will be most clearly seen if we accept
the very reasonable division of periods made by Wallon in his _History
of Slavery_—the first down to 201 BC, the end of the second Punic war,
the second to the age of the Antonine emperors, 200 BC to the death of
Marcus Aurelius in 180 AD, and the third that of the later Empire. For
of the first we have no contemporary or nearly contemporary pictures
surviving. Traditions preserved by later writers, notes of antiquaries
on words and customs long obscured by time and change, are the staple
material at hand. Even with the help of a few survivals in law, inference
from such material is unavoidably timid and incomplete. In collecting
what the later Romans believed of their past we get vivid impressions
of the opinions and prejudices that went to form the Roman spirit. But
it does not follow that we can rely on these opinions as solid evidence
of facts. An instance may be found in the assertion[574] that a clause
requiring the employment of a certain proportion of free labourers to
slaves was included in the Licinian laws of 367 BC. This used to be
taken as a fact, and inferences were drawn from it, but it is now with
reason regarded as an ‘anticipation,’ transferring the fact of a later
attempt of the kind to an age in which the slave-gangs were not as yet an
evident economic and social danger. In the second period, that of Roman
greatness, we have not only contemporary witness for much of the time in
the form of references and allusions in literature, but the works of the
great writers on agriculture, Cato Varro and Columella, not to mention
the great compiler Pliny, fall within it, and give us on the whole a
picture exceptionally complete. We know more of the farm-management and
labour-conditions in this period than we do of most matters of antiquity.
The last period sees the development of a change the germs of which are
no doubt to be detected in the preceding one. The great strain on the
Empire, owing to the internal decay and the growing pressure of financial
necessities, made the change inevitable; economic freedom and proprietary
slavery died down, and we have before us the transition to predial
serfdom, the system of the unfree tenant bound to the soil. The record of
this change is chiefly preserved in the later Roman Law.

My first business is therefore to inquire what the tradition of early
times amounts to, and how far it may reasonably be taken as evidence of
fact. And it must be borne in mind that my subject is not the technical
details of agriculture in general, but the nature of the labour employed
in agriculture. In ages when voluntary peace between empires and peoples
on _bona fide_ equal terms was never a realized fact, and as yet hardly a
dream, the stability of a state depended on the strength of its military
forces,—their number, efficiency, and means of renewal. Mere numbers[575]
were tried and failed. The hire of professional soldiers of fortune[576]
might furnish technical skill, but it was politically dangerous. Their
leaders had no personal sentiment in favour of the state employing them,
and their interest or ambition disposed them rather to support a tyrant,
or to become tyrants themselves, than to act as loyal defenders of the
freedom of the state. Mercenaries[577] hired in the mass, barbarians,
were less skilled but not less dangerous. That a well-trained army of
citizens was the most trustworthy organ of state-protection, was not
disputed: the combination of loyalty with skill made it a most efficient
weapon. The ratio of citizen enthusiasm to the confidence created by
exact discipline varied greatly in the Greek republics of the fifth
century BC. But these two elements were normally present, though in
various proportions. The common defect, most serious in those states that
played an active part, was the smallness of scale that made it difficult
to keep up the strength of citizen armies exposed to the wastage of
war. A single great disaster might and did turn a struggle for empire
into a desperate fight for existence. The constrained transition to
employment of mercenary troops as the principal armed force of states
was both a symptom and a further cause of decay in the Greek republics.
For the sturdy soldiers of fortune were generally drawn from the rustic
population of districts in which agriculture filled a more important
place than political life. There is little doubt that a decline of
food-production in Greece was the result: and scarcity of food had long
been a persistent difficulty underlying and explaining most of the doings
of the Greeks. The rise of Macedon and the conquests of Alexander proved
the military value of a national army of trained rustics, and reasserted
the superiority of such troops to the armed multitudes of the East. But
Alexander’s career did not leave the world at peace. His empire broke
up in a period of dynastic wars; for to supply an imperial army strong
enough to support a single control and guarantee internal peace was
beyond the resources of Macedonia.

If an army of considerable strength, easily maintained and recruited,
loyal, the servant of the state and not its master, was necessary for
defence and as an instrument of foreign politics, there was room for a
better solution of the problem than had been found in Greece or the East.
It was found in Italy on the following lines. An increase of scale could
only be attained by growth. Growth, to be effective, must not consist
in mere conquest: it must be true expansion, in other words it must
imply permanent occupation. And permanent occupation implied settlement
of the conquering people on the conquered lands. A growing population
of rustic citizens, self-supporting, bound by ties of sentiment and
interest to the state of which they were citizens, conscious of a duty
to uphold the state to which they owed their homesteads and their
security, supplied automatically in response to growing needs the
growing raw material of power. Nor was Roman expansion confined to the
assignation of land-allotments to individuals (_viritim_). Old towns
were remodelled, and new ones founded, under various conditions as
settlements (_coloniae_). Each settler in one of these towns received an
allotment of land in the territory of the township, and was officially
speaking a tiller of the soil (_colonus_). The effect of these Colonies
was twofold. Their territories added to the sum of land in occupation of
Romans or Roman Allies: so far the gain was chiefly material. But they
were all bound to Rome and subjected to Roman influences. In their turn
they influenced the conquered peoples among whom they were planted, and
promoted slowly and steadily the Romanizing of Italy. Being fortified,
they had a military value from the first, as commanding roads and as
bases of campaigns. But their moral effect in accustoming Italians to
regard Rome as the controlling centre of Italy was perhaps of even
greater importance.

We must not ignore or underrate the advantages of Rome’s position from a
commercial point of view. Little though we hear of this in tradition, it
can hardly be doubted that it gave Rome a marked superiority in resources
to her less happily situated neighbours, and enabled her to take the
first great step forward by becoming dominant in central Italy. But the
consolidation and completion of her conquest of the peninsula was carried
out by means of an extended Roman agriculture. It was this that gave to
Roman expansion the solid character that distinguished republican Rome
from other conquering powers. What she took, that she could keep. When
the traditional story of early Rome depicts the Roman commons as hungry
for land, and annexation of territory as the normal result of conquest,
it is undoubtedly worthy of belief. When it shews us the devastation of
their enemies’ lands as a chief part—sometimes the whole—of the work of
a campaign, it is in full agreement with the traditions of all ancient
warfare. When we read[578] that the ruin of farms by raids of the enemy
brought suffering farmers into debt, and that the cruel operation of
debt-laws led to serious internal troubles in the Roman state, the story
is credible enough. The superior organization of Rome enabled her to
overcome these troubles, not only by compromises and concessions at
home, but still more by establishing her poorer citizens on farms at the
cost of her neighbours. As the area under her control was extended, the
military force automatically grew, and she surpassed her rivals in the
cohesion and vitality of her power. At need, her armies rose from the
soil. So did those of other Italian peoples. But in dealing with them she
enjoyed the advantage of unity as compared with the far less effective
cooperation of Samnite cantons or Etruscan cities. Even the capture
of Rome by the Gauls could not destroy her system, and she was able
to strengthen her moral position by proving herself the one competent
defender of Italy against invasion from the North. When the time came
for the struggle with Carthage, she had to face a different test. But no
blundering on the part of her generals, no strategy of Hannibal, could
avail to nullify the solid superiority of her military strength. And this
strength was in the last resort derived from the numbers and loyalty of
the farm-population: it was in fact the product of the plough rather than
the sword.

The agricultural conditions of early Rome[579] are a subject, and have
been the subject, of special treatises. Only a few points can be noticed
here. That a communal system of some kind once existed, whether in the
form of the associations known to inquirers as Village Communities or
on a gentile basis as Clan-estates, is a probable hypothesis. But the
evidence for it is slight, and, however just the general inferences
may be, they can hardly be said to help us much in considering the
labour-question. It may well be true that lands[580] were held by clans,
that they were cultivated in common, that the produce was divided among
the households, that parcels of the land were granted to the dependants
(_clientes_) of the clan as tenants at will (_precario_) on condition
of paying a share of their crops. Or it may be that the normal unit was
a village in which the members were several freeholders of small plots,
with common rights over the undivided common-land, the waste left free
for grazing and miscellaneous uses. And it is possible that at some stage
or other of social development both these systems may have existed side
by side. In later times we find Rome the mistress of a vast territory in
Italy, a large part of which was reserved as state-domain (_ager publicus
populi Romani_), the mismanagement of which was a source of grave
evils. But in Rome’s early days there cannot have been any great amount
of such domain-land. That there was land-hunger, a demand for several
allotments in full ownership, on which a family might live, is not to be
doubted. And the formation of communities, each with its village centre
and its common pasture, was a very natural means to promote mutual help
and protection. That men so situated worked with their own hands, and
that the labour was mainly (and often wholly) that of the father and his
family, is as nearly certain as such a proposition can be. But this does
not imply or suggest that no slave-labour was employed on the farms.
It merely means that farms were not worked on a system in which all
manual labour was performed by slaves. We have to inquire what is the
traditional picture of agricultural conditions in the early days of Rome,
and how far that picture is worthy of our belief.

Now it so happens that, three striking figures stand out in the
traditional picture of the Roman farmer-soldiers of the early
Republic. Others fill in certain details, but the names of Lucius
Quinctius Cincinnatus, Manius Curius Dentatus, and Gaius Fabricius
Luscinus, were especially notable in Roman legend as representing the
strenuous patriotic and frugal lives of the heroes of old. The story
of Cincinnatus[581] is told by Cicero Livy Dionysius and Pliny the
elder, and often referred to by other writers. The hero is a Patrician
of the old simple frugal patriotic masterful type, the admiration and
imitation of which these edifying legends seek to encourage. He had
owned seven _iugera_ of land, but had been driven to pledge or sell
three of these[582] in order to provide bail for his son, who had been
brought to trial for disturbance of the public peace and had sought
safety in flight. The forfeit imposed on the father left him with only
four _iugera_. This little farm, on the further side of the Tiber, he
was cultivating, when deputies from the Senate came to announce that
he had been named Dictator to deal with a great emergency. They found
him digging or ploughing, covered with dust and sweat: and he would not
receive them till he had washed and gowned himself. Then he heard their
message, took up the duties of the supreme office, and of course saved
the state. It is to be noted that he chose as his Master of the Horse
(the Dictator’s understudy) a man of the same[583] sort, Patrician by
birth, poor, but a stout warrior. We may fairly suspect that a definite
moral purpose has been at work, modelling and colouring this pretty
story. In a later age, when the power of moneyed interests was overriding
the prestige of Patrician blood, the reaction of an ‘old-Roman’ party
was long a vigorous force in Roman life, as we see from the career of
the elder Cato. Cato was a Plebeian, but any Plebeian who admired the
simple ways of early Rome was bound to recognize that Patricians were the
nobility of the olden time.

Now the fact of Cincinnatus working with his own hands is the one
material point in the story. We need not doubt that there were many such
men, and that a name (perhaps correct) was necessary in order to keep
the story current and to impress later generations with the virtues of
their ancestors. But, if the man had under him a slave or slaves, the
fact would be quite unimportant for the purpose of the legend. Therefore
it is no wonder that the versions of the story in general say nothing
of slaves. It is more remarkable that in the version of Dionysius we
read that Cincinnatus, after selling off most of his property to meet
the liabilities incurred through his son, ‘kept for himself one small
farm beyond the Tiber, on which there was a mean cabin: there he was
living a life of toil and hardship, tilling the soil with a few slaves.’
That Dionysius was a rhetorician with an eye for picturesque detail,
and liable to overdraw a picture, is certain: but it is not evident how
the mention of the slaves is to be accounted for by this tendency. The
impression of the hero’s poverty and personal labour is rather weakened
by mention of slaves. The writer derived his story from Roman sources.
Now, did the original version include the slaves or not? Did Livy and the
rest leave them out, or did Dionysius put them in? Were they omitted as
useless or embarrassing for the uses of edifying, or were they casually
inserted owing to the prepossessions of a Greek familiar only with a
developed slave-system, to whom ‘with a few slaves’ would fitly connote
poverty? To answer these questions with confidence is perhaps unwise. But
to me it seems far more likely that Roman writers left the detail out
than that a Greek student put it in.

If the tradition of the early wars is of any value at all, it may give a
general support to this opinion through the frequent references to the
existence of rustic slavery. The devastation of an enemy’s country is the
normal occupation of hostile armies. The capture of slaves[584], as of
flocks and herds and beasts of burden, is a common item in the tale of
booty from the farms. That writers of a later age may have exaggerated
the slave-element in the farm-labour of early times is highly probable.
The picturesque was an object, and it was natural to attempt it with
the use of touches suggested by daily circumstances of the world in
which they were living. But that they so completely misrepresented the
conditions of a past age as to foist into the picture so important a
figure as the slave, without authority or probability, is hardly to be
believed, unless there is good reason for thinking that slavery was
unknown in the age and country of which they speak. And the contrary is
the case. The dawn of Roman history shews us a people already advanced
in civilization to the stage of family and clan organization, and the
tradition allows for the presence of the slave in the _familia_ from the
first. True, he does not appear as the despised human chattel of later
times, but as a man whom misfortune has placed in bondage. His master
is aware that fortune may turn, and that his bondman is quite capable
of resuming his former position if restored in freedom to his native
home. The slave seems to be normally an Italian[585], a captive in some
war; he may have passed by sale from one owner to another. But he is
not a mere foreign animal, good bad or indifferent, a doubtful purchase
from a roguish dealer. He bears a name[586] that connects him with his
master, _Publipor Lucipor Marcipor Olipor_ and so on, formed by adding
the suffix _por_ to the forename of Publius Lucius Marcus or Aulus. But,
granting that all households might include a slave or two, and that many
so did, also that agriculture was a common and honourable pursuit,—is
it likely that a farming owner would himself plough or dig and leave
his slave[587] to look on? I conclude therefore that the age was one in
which agriculture prevailed and that the ordinary farmer worked himself
and employed slave-labour side by side with his own so far as his means
allowed. All was on a small scale. Passages of Livy or Dionysius that
imply the presence of great slave-gangs, and desertions on a large scale
in time of war are falsely coloured by ‘anticipation’ of phenomena well
known from the experience of more recent times. But, on however small a
scale, slavery was there. Until there came an impulse of an ‘industrial’
kind, prompting men to engage in wholesale production for a large market,
the slave remained essentially a domestic, bearing a considerable share
of the family labours, whatever the nature of those labours might be.

As there is no difficulty in believing that Cincinnatus and others
of his type in the fifth century BC worked with slaves beside them,
so it is evident that Curius and Fabricius in the first half of the
third century are meant to illustrate the same frugal life and solid
patriotism. In both cases the story lays particular stress on the
hero’s incorruptibility and cheerful endurance of poverty. A well-known
scene[588] represents Curius at his rustic villa eating a dinner of
herbs and refusing a gift of gold from Samnite ambassadors. He is an
honest farmer-citizen of the good old sort. Fabricius is another, famed
especially for his calm defiance of the threats and cajolery of Pyrrhus,
and impervious to bribes. Both these traditions received much legendary
colouring in course of time. The passage bearing most directly on my
present inquiry is a fragment[589] of Dionysius, in which Fabricius is
spurning the offers of king Pyrrhus, who is very anxious to secure the
good man’s services as his chief minister on liberal terms. He says ‘nor
need I tell you of my poverty, that I have but a very small plot of
land with a mean cottage, and that I get my living neither from money
at interest (ἀπὸ δανεισμάτων) nor from slaves (ἀπ’ ἀνδραπόδων).’ Below
he declares that living under Roman conditions he holds himself a happy
man, ‘for with industry and thrift I find my poor little farm sufficient
to provide me with necessaries.’ And his constitution (φύσις) does not
constrain him to hanker after unnecessary things. Here we have a good
specimen of the moral stories with which the later rhetoricians edified
their readers. But what does ‘from slaves’ mean? Is Fabricius denying
that he employs slave-labour on his farm? If so, I confess that I do
not believe the denial as being his own genuine utterance. I take it to
be put into his mouth by Dionysius, writing under the influence of the
agricultural conditions of a much later time, when great slaveowners drew
large incomes from the exploitation of slave-labour on great estates. But
I am not sure that Dionysius means him to be saying more than ‘I am not
a big capitalist farming on a large scale by slave-gangs.’ How far this
writer really understood the state of things in the third century BC,
is hard to say. In any case he is repeating what he has picked up from
earlier writers and not letting it suffer in the repetition. Taken by
himself, he is no more a sufficient witness to the practice of Fabricius
than to that of Cincinnatus. That there was slavery is certain: that
Fabricius had scruples against employing slaves is hardly credible.

In the ages during which Rome gradually won her way to the headship of
Italy the Roman citizen was normally both farmer and soldier: the soldier
generally a man called up from his farm for a campaign, the farmer of
military age always potentially a soldier. This state of things was
evidently not peculiar to Rome. What makes it striking in the case of
Rome is the well-considered system by which the military machine was kept
in working order. The development of fortress colonies and extension
of roads gave to Roman farmers in the border-lands more security than
any neighbouring power could give to its own citizens on its own side
of the border. Mobilization was more prompt and effective on the Roman
side under a central control: the fortresses served as a hindrance to
hostile invaders, as refuges to the rustics at need, and as bases for
Roman armies. It is no great stretch of imagination to see in this
organization a reason for the prosperity of Roman agriculture. Farms
were no doubt laid waste on both sides of the border, but the balance of
the account was in the long run favourable to Rome. Among the numerous
legends that gathered round the name of king Pyrrhus is a story[590] that
in reply to some discontent on the part of his Italian allies, to whom
his strategy seemed over-cautious, he said ‘the mere look of the country
shews me the great difference between you and the Romans. In the parts
subject to them are all manner of fruit-trees and vineyards: the land
is cultivated and the farm-establishments are costly: but the estates
of my friends are so laid waste that all signs of human occupation have
disappeared.’ The saying may be not authentic or merely overdrawn in
rhetorical transmission. But it probably contains the outlines of a true
picture of the facts. It was the power of giving to her farmer-settlers a
more effective protection than her rivals could give to their own farmers
that enabled Rome to advance steadily and continuously. The organization
was simple enough: the sword was ready to guard the plough, and the
plough to occupy and hold the conquests of the sword.

From the time of the first Punic war we have a remarkable story relating
to M Atilius Regulus, the man around whose name so much patriotic legend
gathered. He appears as one of the good old farmer-heroes. His farm[591]
of seven _iugera_ lay in an unhealthy part of the country, and the soil
was poor. His advice to agriculturists, not to buy good land in an
unhealthy district nor bad land in a healthy one, was handed down as the
opinion of a qualified judge. We are told[592] that after his victory
in Africa he desired to be relieved and return home; but the Senate did
not send out another commander, and so he had to stay on. He wrote and
complained of his detention. Among other reasons he urged in particular
his domestic anxiety. In the epitome of Livy XVIII this appears as
‘that his little farm had been abandoned by the hired men.’ In Valerius
Maximus[593] we find a fuller account, thus ‘that the steward in charge
of his little farm (seven _iugera_ in the _Pupinia_) had died, and the
hired man (_mercennarium_) had taken the opportunity to decamp, taking
with him the farm-stock: therefore he asked them to relieve him of his
command, for he feared his wife and children would have nothing to live
on now the farm was abandoned.’ On hearing this, the Senate ordered
that provision should at once be made at the cost of the state (_a_)
for cultivation of his farm[594] by contract (_b_) for maintenance of
his wife and children (_c_) for making good the losses he had suffered.
The reference of Pliny[595] rather confirms the details of Valerius,
who by himself is not a very satisfactory witness. Livy is probably the
source of all these versions. They are part of the Roman tradition of
the first Punic war. Polybius, whose narrative is from another line of
tradition, says not a word of this story. Indeed, he declares[596] that
Regulus, so far from wishing to be relieved, wanted to stay on, fearing
that he might hand over the credit of a final victory to a successor. The
two traditions cannot be reconciled as they stand. Probably neither is
complete. If we suppose the account of Polybius to be true, it does not
follow as a matter of course that the other story is a baseless fiction.
In any case, the relation of Regulus to the agriculture of his day, as
represented by the story, seemed credible to Romans of a later age, and
deserves serious consideration.

We are told that in the middle of the third century BC a man of such
position and recognized merit that he was specially chosen to fill the
place of a deceased consul in the course of a great war was a farmer on
an estate of seven _iugera_, from which he was supporting his wife and
family. In his absence on public duty he had left the farm in charge
of a _vilicus_. The only reference to the labour employed there speaks
of hired men (wage-earners, _mercennarii_). It does not say that there
were no slaves. But the natural inference is that the _vilicus_ had the
control of a staff consisting wholly or largely of free labourers. Now
that a slave _vilicus_ might in the ordinary run of business be left
in control of labourers, slave or free, seems clear from directions
given by Cato[597] in the next century. The _vilicus_ in this story was
therefore probably a slave, as they were generally if not always. His
death left the hired men uncontrolled, and they took the opportunity
of robbing their employer. Roused by the absent consul’s complaints
(whether accompanied by a request for relief or not), the Senate took up
the matter and arranged to secure him against loss. We do not hear of
the punishment of the dishonest hirelings, or even of a search for them.
This may be merely an omitted detail: at any rate they had probably left
the neighbourhood. The curious thing is that we hear nothing of the wife
of Regulus: that a Roman matron submitted tamely to such treatment is
hard to believe. Was it she who made the complaints and set the Senate
in motion? The general outcome of the story is a conclusion that hired
labour was freely employed in this age, not to exclusion of slave labour,
but combined with it: that is, that the wage-earning work of landless
men, such as appears in the earlier traditions, still went on. It was not
yet overlaid by the plantation-system, and degraded by the associations
of the slave-gang and the _ergastulum_.

When we pass on to the second Punic war, of which we have a fuller and
less legendary record, we find the circumstances somewhat changed, but
the importance of the Roman farmer’s grip of the land is recognized
as clearly as before. It is not unlikely that since the time of the
Pyrrhic war the practise of large-scale farming with slave-labour had
begun to appear[598] in Italy, but it can hardly as yet have been
widespread. Large or small, the farms in a large part of the country
had suffered from the ravages of Hannibal, and it would be the land of
Romans and their faithful allies that suffered most. Many rustics had
to seek shelter in walled towns, above all in Rome, and their presence
was no doubt in many ways embarrassing. Naturally, as the failure of
Hannibal became manifest, the Roman Senate was desirous of restoring
these refugees to the land and relieving the pressure on the city. Livy,
drawing no doubt from an earlier annalist, tells us[599] that in 206
BC the Senate instructed the consuls, before they left for the seat of
war, to undertake the bringing back of the common folk (_plebis_) on
to the land. They pointed out that this was desirable, and possible
under the better conditions now prevailing. ‘But it was for the people
(_populo_) not at all an easy matter; for the free farmers (_cultoribus_)
had perished in the war, there was a shortage of slaves (_inopia
servitiorum_), the live stock had been carried off, and the farmsteads
(_villis_) wrecked or burnt. Yet under pressure from the consuls a good
many did go back to the land.’ He adds that what had raised the question
at this particular juncture was the appeal of a deputation from Placentia
and Cremona. These two Latin colonies, founded twelve years before as
fortresses to hold the region of the Po, had suffered from Gaulish
raids and had no longer a sufficient population, many settlers having
gone off elsewhere. The Roman commander in the district was charged to
provide for their protection, and the truant colonists ordered to return
to their posts. It was evidently thought that with full numbers and
military support there would be an end to the derelict condition of their
territories, and that the two colonies would soon revive.

This attempt to reestablish the rustic population lays stress upon the
general identity of farmer and soldier and the disturbance of agriculture
by the ravages of war. But most notable is the mention of the shortage
of slave-labour as a hindrance to resumption of work on derelict farms.
It has been held[600] that this clause refers only to large estates
worked by slave-gangs, while the free farmers stand for the men on small
holdings, who presumably employed no slaves. Now it is quite conceivable
that this contrast may have been in Livy’s mind as he wrote in the days
of Augustus. That it was the meaning of the older author from whom he
took the facts is not an equally probable inference. No doubt lack of
slaves would hinder or prevent the renewal of tillage on a big estate.
But what of a small farm whose owner had fallen in the war? The absence
of the father in the army would be a most serious blow to the efficient
working of the farm. If the raids of the enemy drove his family to take
refuge in Rome, and the farm was let down to weeds, more labour than
ever would be needed to renew cultivation. When there was no longer
any hope of his return, the supply of sufficient labour was the only
chance of reviving the farm. Surely there must have been many cases in
which the help of one or two slaves was the obvious means of supplying
it. Therefore, if we recognize that slave-labour had long been a common
institution in Roman households, we shall not venture to assert that only
large estates are referred to. That such estates, worked by slave-gangs,
were numerous in 206 BC, is not likely: that small farmers often (not
always) eked out their own labour with the help of a slave, is far more
so. The actual shortage of slaves[601] had been partly brought about by
the employment of many in military service. Some had no doubt simply run
away. And the period of great foreign conquests and a full slave-market
had yet to come.

I do not venture to dispute that the accumulation of capital in the
form of ready money available for speculation in state leases, farming
of revenues, and other contracts, had already begun at Rome in the age
of the great Punic wars. In the second war, contracts for the supply of
necessaries to the armed forces played a considerable part, and we hear
of contractors[602] who practised shameless frauds on the state. Greed
was a plant that throve in the soil of Roman life: the scandals of the
later Republic were merely the sinister developments of an old tendency
favoured by opportunities. Land-grabbing in particular was, if consistent
tradition may be believed, from early times a passion of Roman nobles:
and the effect of a law[603] forbidding them to become ship-owners and
engage in commerce was to concentrate their enterprise on the acquisition
of great landed estates. Another notable fact is the large voluntary
loans[604] which the government was able to raise in the critical period
of the great war. In the year 210, when the financial strain was extreme,
a very large contribution of the kind took place. In 204 the Senate
arranged a scheme[605] for repayment in three instalments. In 200 the
lenders, apparently alarmed by the delay in paying the second instalment,
became clamorous. The Punic war was at an end, and war with Philip of
Macedon just declared: they wanted to get their money back. We are
told[606] that the state was not able to find the cash, and that the cry
of many creditors was ‘there are plenty of farms for sale, and we want
to buy.’ The Senate devised a middle way of satisfying them. They were
to be offered the chance of acquiring the state domain-land within fifty
miles of Rome at a valuation fixed by the consuls. This seems to mean,
up to the amount of the instalment then in question. But they were not
thereby to receive the land in full private[607] property. A quit-rent of
one _as_ was to be set on each _iugerum_, in evidence that the property
still belonged to the state. Thus, when the state finances should admit,
they might get back their ready money if they preferred it and give back
the land to the state. The offer was gladly accepted, and the land taken
over on these terms was called ‘third-part land’ (_trientabulum_) as
representing ⅓ of the money lent. The final instalment appears to have
been paid in cash[608] in the year 196.

That these patriotic creditors were men with a keen eye for a bargain,
and that they made a good one in the above arrangement, is pretty clear.
This is the only occasion on which we hear of the _trientabula_ plan
of settling a money claim by what was in effect a perpetual lease at
a nominal rent terminable by reconversion into a money claim at the
pleasure of the lessee. No doubt the valuation was so made as to give
the creditor a good margin of security over and above the sum secured.
There was therefore no temptation to call for the cash and surrender the
land. From the reference[609] to _trientabula_ in the agrarian law of 111
BC it would seem that some at least of these beneficial tenancies were
still in existence after the lapse of nearly 90 years. They would pass
by inheritance or sale as the ordinary _possessiones_ of state domains
did, and eventually become merged in the private properties that were the
final result of the land-legislation of the revolutionary age. For the
capitalists, already powerful in 200 BC, became more and more powerful as
time went on. And this use of public land to discharge public debts was
undoubtedly a step tending to promote the formation of the great estates
(_latifundia_) which were the ruin of the wholesome old land-system in
a great part of Italy. With this tendency the wholesale employment of
slave-labour went hand in hand.

But we must not forget that the creditors in 200 BC are made to press for
their money on the ground that they wanted to invest it in land, of which
there was plenty then in the market. This may be a detail added by Livy
himself: but surely it is more likely that he is repeating what he found
in his authorities. In any case the land referred to can hardly be other
than the derelict farms belonging to those who had suffered by the war.
In earlier times we have traditions of men losing their lands through
inability to pay the debts for which they stood pledged. In a somewhat
later time we hear[610] of small farmers being bought out cheaply by
neighbouring big landlords, and bullied if they made difficulty about
leaving their farms. The present case is different, arising directly
out of the war. The father of a family might be dead, or disinclined to
go back to monotonous toil after the excitements of military life, or
unable to find the extra labour for reclaiming a wasted and weed-grown
farm, or means of restocking it. He or his heir would probably not have
capital to tide him over the interval before the farm was again fully
productive: his immediate need was probably ready money. No wonder that
farms were in the market, and at prices that made a land-grabber’s
mouth water. The great war certainly marked a stage in the decay of the
small-farm agriculture, the healthy condition of which had hitherto been
the soundest element of Roman strength.

Before we leave the traditions of the early period it is necessary to
refer to the question of free wage-earning labour. Have we any reason to
think that under the conditions of early Rome there was any considerable
class of rustic[611] wage-earners? Nearly all the passages that suggest
an affirmative answer are found in the work of Dionysius, who repeatedly
uses[612] the Greek word θητεύειν of this class of labour. It is
represented as being practically servile, for it meant working with
slaves or at least doing the work which according to the writer[613] was
(even in the regal period) done by slaves. The poor Plebeians appear as
loathing such service: their desire is for plots of land on which each
man can work freely for himself. This desire their protectors, kings
or tribunes, endeavour to gratify by allotments as occasion serves.
Now that there was land-hunger from the earliest times, and that
agriculture was in itself an honourable trade, we have no good reason
for doubting. But that the dislike of wage-earning labour as such was
the main motive of land-hunger is a more doubtful proposition. It may
be true, but it sounds very like an explanation supplied by a learned
but rhetorical historian. We know that Dionysius regarded Rome as a city
of Greek origin. The legends of early Attica were doubtless familiar
to him. We may grant that there was probably some likeness between the
labour-conditions of early Rome and early Athens. But historians are ever
tempted to detect analogies in haste and remodel tradition at leisure.
I suspect that the two features of the same picture, the prevalence of
rustic slavery and also of rustic wage-earning, are taken from different
lines of tradition, and both overdrawn.

In connexion with this question it is necessary to turn back to a
remarkable passage[614] of Livy referring to the year 362 BC. The famous
L Manlius the martinet (_imperiosus_) was threatened with a public
prosecution by a tribune for misuse of his powers as dictator in the
year just past. To create prejudice against the accused, the prosecutor
further alleged that he had treated his son Titus with cruel severity.
The young man was slow of wit and speech, but no wrongdoing had been
brought home to him. Yet his father had turned him out of his city home,
had cut him off from public life and the company of other youths, and put
him to servile work, shutting him up in what was almost a slaves’ prison
(_ergastulum_). The daily affliction of such a life was calculated to
teach the dictator’s son that he had indeed a martinet for his father.
To keep his son among the flocks in the rustic condition and habit of a
country boor was to intensify any natural defects of his own offspring,
conduct too heartless for even the brute beasts. But the young Manlius
upset all calculations. On hearing what was in contemplation he started
for Rome with a knife, made his way into the tribune’s presence in the
morning and made him solemnly swear to drop the prosecution by a threat
of killing him then and there if he did not take the oath. The tribune
swore, and the trial fell through. The Roman commons were vexed to lose
the chance of using their votes to punish the father for his arbitrary
and unfeeling conduct, but they approved the dutiful act of the son, and
took the first opportunity of electing him a military officer. This young
man was afterwards the renowned T Manlius Torquatus, who followed his
father’s example of severity by putting to death his own son for a breach
of military discipline.

The story is a fine specimen of the edifying legends kept in circulation
by the Romans of later days. That the greatness of Rome was above all
things due to their grim old fathers who endured hardness and sacrificed
all tender affections to public duty, was the general moral of these
popular tales. Exaggeration grew with repetition, and details became
less and less authentic. In particular the circumstances of their own
time were foisted in by narrators whose imagination did not suffice to
grasp the difference of conditions in the past. In the above story we
have a reference to _ergastula_, the barracoons in which the slave-gangs
on great estates were confined when not actually at work. Now the
system of which these private prisons were a marked feature certainly
belongs to a later period, when agriculture on a large scale was widely
practised, not to make a living for a man and his family, but to make a
great income for a single individual by the labour of many. Here then
we have a detail clearly not authentic, which throws doubt on the whole
setting of the story. Again, we have agricultural labour put before us
as degrading (_opus servile_). It is a punishment, banishing a young
Roman from his proper surrounding in the life of Rome, and dooming
him to grow up a mere clodhopper. There may have been some points in
the original story of which this is an exaggerated version: for it is
evident that from quite early days of the Republic men of the ruling
class found it necessary to spend much time in or quite close to the
city. But the representation of agriculture as a servile occupation is
grossly inconsistent with the other legends glorifying the farmer-heroes
of yore. It is of course quite impossible to prove that no isolated cases
of a young Roman’s banishment to farm life ever occurred. But that such
a proceeding was so far ordinary as fairly to be reckoned typical, is
in the highest degree improbable. That later writers should invent or
accept such colouring for their picture, is no wonder. In the Attic New
Comedy, with which Roman society was familiarized[615] in the second
century BC, this situation was found. The later conditions of Roman life,
in city and country, tended to make the view of agriculture as a servile
trade, capable of being rendered penal, more and more intelligible to
Romans. Accordingly we find this view cynically accepted[616] by Sallust,
and warmly protested against[617] by Cicero. In order to weaken the
case of his client Sextus Roscius, it was urged that the young man’s
father distrusted him and sent him to live the life of a boor on his
farm in Umbria. Cicero, evidently anxious as to the possible effect of
this construction of facts on the coming verdict, was at great pains
to counter it by maintaining that the father’s decision was in truth a
compliment: in looking for an honest and capable manager of his rustic
estate he had found the right man in this son. The orator surely did
not enlarge on this point for nothing. And it is to be noted that in
insisting on the respectability of a farmer’s life he sees fit to refer
to the farmer-consuls of the olden time. He feels, no doubt, that
unsupported assertions[618] as to the employment of sons in agriculture
by his contemporaries were not likely to carry much weight with the jury.

After the above considerations I come to the conclusion that Livy’s
representation of agriculture as a servile occupation in the case
of Manlius is a coloured utterance of no historical value. A minute
consistency is not to be looked for in the writings of an author to whom
picturesqueness of detail appeals differently at different moments. For
Livy was in truth deeply conscious of the sad changes in Italian country
life brought about by the transition to large-scale agriculture. Under
the year 385 he is driven to moralize[619] on the constant renewal of
Volscian and Aequian wars. How ever did these two small peoples find
armies for the long-continued struggle? He suggests possible answers
to the question, the most significant of which is that in those days
there was a dense free population in those districts,—districts which in
his own time, he says, would be deserted but for the presence of Roman
slaves. To describe vividly the decay of free population, he adds that
only a poor little nursery of soldiers is left (_vix seminario exiguo
militum relicto_) in those parts. The momentous results of the change
of system are not more clearly grasped by Lucan or Pliny himself. Livy
then is not to be cited as a witness to the existence of great numbers of
rustic slaves in Italy before the second Punic war, nor even then for the
highly-organized gang-system by which an industrial character was given
to agriculture.

One more story, and a strange one, needs to be considered, for it
bears directly on the labour-question. The time in which it is placed
is the latter part of the period of the Roman conquest of Italy. In
a fragment[620] of one of his later books Dionysius tells us of the
arbitrary doings of a consul Postumius, a Patrician of high rank who had
already been twice consul. After much bullying he made his colleague, a
Plebeian of recent nobility, resign to him the command in the Samnite
war. This was an unpopular act, but he went on to worse. From his
army he drafted some 2000 men on to his own estate, and set them to
cut away brushwood without providing cutting tools (ἄνευ σιδήρου).
And he kept them there a long time doing the work of wage-earners or
slaves (θητῶν ἔργα καὶ θεραπόντων ὑπηρετοῦντας). Into the tale of his
further acts of arbitrary insolence we need not enter here, nor into
the public prosecution and condemnation to a heavy fine that awaited
him at the end of his term of office. Suffice it that the story is in
general confirmed[621] by Livy, and that the hero of it seems to have
been remembered in Roman tradition as a classic instance of self-willed
audacity and disregard of the conventions that were the soul of Roman
public life. So far as the labour is concerned, it seems to me that what
was objected to in the consul’s conduct was the use of his military
supreme power (_imperium_) for his own private profit. He treated a
fatigue-party as a farm labour-gang. Freemen might work on their own land
side by side with their slaves: they might work for wages on another
man’s land side by side with his slaves. Any objection they might feel
would be due to the unwelcome pressure of economic necessity. But to
be called out for military service (and in most cases from their own
farms), and then set to farm-labour on another man’s land under military
discipline, was too much. We must bear in mind that a Roman army of the
early Republic was not composed of pauper adventurers who preferred a
life of danger with hopes of loot and licence to hard monotonous toil.
The very poor were not called out, and the ranks were filled with
citizens who had at least some property to lose. Therefore it might
easily happen that a soldier set to rough manual labour by Postumius had
to do for him the service that was being done at home for himself by a
wage-earner or a slave. He was a soldier because he was a free citizen;
he was being employed in place of a slave because he was a soldier under
martial law. In no free republic could such a wrong be tolerated. The
words of the epitome of Livy state the case with sufficient precision. _L
Postumius consularis, quoniam cum exercitui praeesset opera militum in
agro suo usus erat, damnatus est._ It is remarkable that, among the other
epitomators and collectors of anecdotes who drew from the store of Livy,
not one, not even Valerius Maximus, records this story. To Livy it must
have seemed important, or he would not have laid enough stress on it to
attract the attention of the writer of the epitome. So too the detailed
version of Dionysius, probably drawn from the same authority as that of
Livy, struck the fancy of a maker of extracts and caused his text to be
preserved to us. It surely descends, like many other of the old stories,
in a line of Plebeian tradition, and is recorded as an illustration of
the survival of Patrician insolence in a headstrong consul after the two
Orders had been politically equalized by the Licinian laws.

Beside these fragments of evidence there are in the later Roman
literature many passages in which writers directly assert that their
forefathers lived a life of simple frugality and worked with their
own hands on their own little farms. But as evidence the value of
such passages is not very great. They testify to a tradition: but in
most cases the tradition is being used for the purposes of moralizing
rhetoric. Now the glorification of ‘good old times’ has in all ages
tempted authors to aim rather at striking contrast between past and
present than at verification of their pictures of the past. To impute
this defect to satirists is a mere commonplace. But those who are not
professed satirists are often exposed to the same influence in a less
degree. The most striking phenomenon in this kind is the chorus of poets
in the Augustan age. The Emperor, aware that the character of Reformer
is never a very popular one, preferred to pose as Restorer. The hint was
given, and the literary world acted on it. Henceforth the praises of the
noble and efficient simplicity of the ancients formed a staple material
of Roman literature.


XXI. ABSTRACT OF CONCLUSIONS.

In reference to the early period down to 201 BC I think we are justified
in coming to the following conclusions.

1. The evidence, consisting of fragmentary tradition somewhat distorted
and in some points exaggerated by the influence of moral purpose on later
writers, is on the whole consistent and credible.

2. From it we get a picture of agriculture as an honourable trade, the
chief occupation of free citizens, who are in general accustomed to work
with their own hands.

3. The Roman citizen as a rule has an allotment of land as his own, and
an early classification of citizens (the ‘Servian Constitution’) was
originally based on landholding, carrying with it the obligation to
military service.

4. The Roman family had a place for the slave, and the slave, a domestic
helper, normally an Italian, was not as yet the despised alien chattel of
whom we read in a later age.

5. As a domestic he bore a part in all the labours of the family, and
therefore as a matter of course in the commonest of all, agriculture.

6. In this there was nothing degrading. Suggestions to that effect are
the echoes of later conditions.

7. Under such relations of master and slave it was quite natural that
manumission should (as it did) operate to make the slave not only free
but a citizen. That this rule led to very troublesome results in a later
period was owing to change of circumstances.

8. Slavery then was, from the earliest times of which we have any
tradition, an integral part of the social and economic system, as much
in Italy as in Greece. It was there, and only needed the stimulus of
prospective economic gain for capitalists to organize it on a crudely
industrial basis, without regard to considerations of humanity or the
general wellbeing of the state.

9. Of wage-earning labour on the part of freemen we have little trace in
tradition. The reported complaints of day-labour performed for Patrician
nobles in early times are probably not unconnected with the institution
of clientship, and in any case highly coloured by rhetoric.




ROME—MIDDLE PERIOD


XXII. INTRODUCTORY GENERAL VIEW.

The overthrow of Carthage put an end to a period of terrible anxiety
to the Roman government, and the first feeling was naturally one of
relief. But the sufferings of the war-weary masses had produced an
intense longing for peace and rest. It might be true that a Macedonian
war was necessary in the interest of the state: but it was only with
great difficulty that the Senate overcame opposition to a forward policy.
For the sufferings of the people, more particularly the farmers, were
not at an end. The war indemnities from Carthage might refill the empty
treasury, and enable the state to discharge its public obligations to
contractors and other creditors. So far well: but receipts of this
kind did little or nothing towards meeting the one vital need, the
reestablishment of displaced peasants on the land. The most accessible
districts, generally the best suited for tillage, had no doubt suffered
most in the disturbances of war; and the future destinies of Rome and
Italy were depending on the form that revival of agriculture would
take. The race of small farmers had been hitherto the backbone of Roman
power. But the wars of the last two generations had brought Rome into
contact with an agricultural system of a very different character. Punic
agriculture[622] was industrial: that is, conducted for profit on a large
scale and directed by purely economic considerations. Cheap production
was the first thing. As the modern large farmer relies on machinery, so
his ancient predecessor relied on domesticated animals; chiefly on the
animal with hands, the human slave.

It is to be borne in mind that during the second Punic war the Roman
practice of employing contractors for all manner of state services
(_publica_) had been greatly developed. Companies of _publicani_ had
played an active part and had thriven on their enterprises. These
companies were probably already, as they certainly were in later times,
great employers of slaves. In any case they represented a purely
industrial and commercial view of life, the ‘economic’ as opposed to the
‘national’ set of principles. Their numbers were beyond all doubt greater
than they had ever been before. With such men the future interests of the
state would easily be obscured by immediate private interests, selfish
appetite being whetted by the recent taste of profits. If a large
section of the farmer class seemed in danger of extinction through the
absorption of their farms in great estates, legislation to prevent it was
not likely to have the warm support of these capitalists. That financial
interests were immensely powerful in the later Roman Republic is
universally admitted, but I do not think sufficient allowance is made for
their influence in the time of exhaustion at the very beginning of the
second century BC. The story of the _trientabula_, discussed above, is
alone enough to shew how this influence was at work; and it was surely no
isolated phenomenon. We have therefore reason to believe that many of the
farmers dispossessed by the war never returned to their former homes, and
we naturally ask what became of them. Some no doubt were unsettled and
unfitted for the monotonous toil of rustic life by the habits contracted
in campaigning. Such men would find urban idleness, or further military
service with loot in prospect, more to their taste: some of these would
try both experiences in turn. We trace their presence in the growth of a
city mob, and in the enlistment of veterans to give tone and steadiness
to somewhat lukewarm armies in new wars. But it is not to be assumed
that this element constituted the whole, or even the greater part, of
those who did not go back to their old farms. The years 200-180 saw the
foundation of 19 new _coloniae_, and it is reasonable to suppose that
the _coloni_ included a number of the men unsettled by the great war.
The group founded in 194-2 were designed to secure the coast of southern
Italy against attack by an Eastern power controlling large fleets. Those
of 189-1 were in the North, the main object being to strengthen the Roman
grip of Cisalpine Gaul. But already in 198-5 it had been found necessary
to support the colonies on the Po (Placentia and Cremona) against attacks
of the Gauls, and in 190 they were reinforced with contingents of fresh
colonists. For the firm occupation of northern Italy was a policy
steadily kept in view, and only interrupted for a time by the strain of
Eastern wars.

In trying to form a notion of the condition of agriculture in the second
century BC, and particularly of the labour question, we must never
lose sight of the fact that military service was still obligatory[623]
on the Roman citizen, and that this was a period of many wars. The
farmer-soldier, liable to be called up at any time until his forty-sixth
year, might have to break off important work which could not without
risk of loss be left in other hands. At the worst, a sudden call might
mean ruin. Pauper wage-earners, landless men, were not reached by the
military levy in the ordinary way. How soon they began to be enrolled
as volunteers, and to what extent, is uncertain. But conscription of
qualified citizens remained the staple method of filling the legions[624]
until the famous levy held by Marius in 107. Conscription had for a long
time been becoming more and more unpopular and difficult to enforce,
save in cases where easy victory and abundant booty were looked for. The
Roman government fell into the habit of employing chiefly the contingents
of the Italian Allies in hard and unremunerative campaigns. This unfair
treatment, and other wrongs to match, led to the great rebellion of 90
BC. But the grant of the Roman franchise to the Italians, extorted by
force of arms, though it made more Roman citizens, could not make more
Roman farmers. The truth is, a specializing process was going on. The
soldier was becoming more and more a professional: farming was becoming
more and more the organized exploitation of labour. Long and distant
wars unfitted the discharged soldiers for the monotonous round of rustic
life: while they kept the slave-market well supplied with captives,
thus making it easy for capitalists to take advantage of great areas of
land cheaply acquired from time to time. Moreover, the advance of Roman
dominion had another effect beside the mere supply of labouring hands.
It made Rome the centre of the Mediterranean world, the place where all
important issues were decided, and where it was necessary to reside. The
wealthy landowner was practically compelled to spend most of his time in
the ruling city, in close touch with public affairs. Now this compelled
him to manage his estates by stewards, keeping an eye on them so far
as his engagements in Rome left him free to do so. And this situation
created a demand for highly-qualified stewards. The supply of these had
to come mainly from the eastern countries of old civilization. But if
technical skill could thus be procured (and it was very necessary for the
variety of crops that were taking the place of corn), it was generally
accompanied by an oriental subtlety the devices of which were not easy
to penetrate. From the warnings of the agricultural writers, as to the
need of keeping a strict watch on a _vilicus_, we may fairly infer that
these favoured slaves were given to robbing their masters. The master,
even if he had the knowledge requisite for practical control, seldom
had the leisure for frequent visits to his estate. What he wanted was
a regular income to spend: and the astute steward who was always ready
with the expected cash on the appointed day had little fear of reprimand
or punishment. His own interest was that his own master should expect as
little as possible, and it is obvious that this would not encourage a
sincere effort to get the most out of the estate in a favourable year.
His master’s expectations would then rise, and the disappointment of poor
returns in a bad year might have serious consequences for himself.

These considerations may help us to understand why the history of the
later Roman Republic gives so gloomy a picture of agriculture.

We find the small farmer, citizen and soldier too, dying out as a class
in a great part of Italy. We find the land passing into the hands of
a few large owners whose personal importance was vastly increased
thereby. Whether bought cheap on a glutted market or ‘possessed’ in a
sort of copyhold tenancy from the state, whether arable or pasture,
it is at all events clear that the bulk of these _latifundia_ (if not
the whole) had been got on very easy terms. The new holders were not
hampered by lack of capital or labour, as may often have been the case
with the old peasantry. Slave-labour was generally cheap, at times
very cheap. Knowledge and skill could be bought, as well as bone and
muscle. Like the ox and the ass, the slave was only fed and clothed
and housed sufficiently to keep him fit for work: his upkeep while at
work was not the canker eating up profits. With the influx of wealth,
the spoils of conquest, the tribute of subject provinces, the profits
of blackmail and usury, prices of almost everything were rising in the
second century BC. Corn, imported and sold cheap to the Roman poor, was
an exception: but the Italian landlords were ceasing to grow corn, save
for local consumption. Some authorities, if not all, thought[625] that
grazing paid better than tillage: and it was notorious that pasturage was
increasing and cultivation declining. The slave-herdsmen, hardy and armed
against wolves and brigands, were a formidable class. When combined with
mutinous gladiators they were, as Spartacus shewed in 73-1 BC, wellnigh
irresistible save by regular armies in formal campaigns. The owner of a
vast estate, controlling huge numbers of able-bodied ruffians who had
nothing to lose themselves and no inducement to spare others, was in fact
a public danger if driven to desperation. He could mobilize an army of
robbers and cutthroats at a few days notice, live on the country, and
draw recruits from all the slave-gangs near. It was not want of power
that crippled the representatives of large-scale agriculture.

And yet in the last days of the Republic, when the fabric of the state
was cracking under repeated strains, we are told that, among the various
types of men led by financial embarrassments to favour revolutionary
schemes, one well-marked group consisted of great landlords. These men,
says[626] Cicero, though deep in debt, could quite well pay what they owe
by selling their lands. But they will not do this: they are ‘land-proud.’
The income from their estates will not cover the interest on their debts,
but they go on foolishly trying to make it do so. In this struggle they
are bound to be beaten. In other words, the return on their landed
estates is not enough to support a life of extravagance in Rome. So they
borrow, at high interest. The creditors of course take good security,
with a margin for risks. So, in order to keep the social status of a
great landlord, the borrower takes a loan of less than the capital value
of his land, while he has to pay for the accommodation more than the
income from the land. Ruin is the certain end of such finance, and it is
only in a revolution that there is any hope of ‘something turning up’ in
favour of the debtor. We must not suppose that all or most of the great
landlords of the day had reached the stage of embarrassment described
by Cicero. That there were some in that plight, is not to be doubted,
even when we have allowed freely for an orator’s overstatements. But it
is hardly rash to suppose that there were some landlords who were not
in debt, at least to a serious extent, either through good returns from
their lands or from other investments, or even from living thriftily.
What seems quite clear is that large-scale farming of land was by no
means so remunerative financially as other forms of investment; and that
though, as pointed out above, it was carried on with not a few points in
its favour.

In the same descriptive passage[627] the orator refers to another class
of landowners ripe for revolution. These were the veterans of Sulla,
settled by him as _coloni_ on lands of farmers dispossessed on pretext
of complicity with his Marian opponents. Their estates were no doubt on
a smaller scale than those of the class just spoken of above. But they
were evidently comfortable allotments. The discharged soldiers made bad
farmers. They meant to enjoy the wealth suddenly bestowed, and they had
no notion of economy. Their extravagance, one form of which was the
keeping of a number[628] of slaves, soon landed them hopelessly in debt.
So they also saw their only chance of recovery in a renewal of civil war
and fresh confiscations. It was said that a number of necessitous rustics
(probably some of the very men ejected from the farms) were ready to
join them in a campaign of plunder. Here we have a special picture of
the military colonist, one of the most sinister figures in the last age
of the Republic. It is no doubt highly coloured, but the group settled
in Etruria were probably some of the worst specimens. In such hands
agriculture could not flourish, and the true interests of Rome could
hardly have suffered a more deadly blow than the transfer of Italian
lands from those who could farm them to those who could not. It was not
merely that lands were ‘let down.’ Italy was made less able to maintain
a native population, fitted and willing to serve the state in peace
and war. The effects of this diminution of the free rustic population
were most seriously felt under the Empire. Writers of the Augustan age
deplore[629] the disappearance of the old races in a large part of
Italy, displaced by alien slaves; and their cry is repeated by later
generations. The imperial country that had conquered the Mediterranean
world became dependent on subjects and foreigners for her own defence.

The evil plight of agriculture in Cicero’s day was merely a continuation
and development of the process observable in the second century.
Experience had probably moderated some of the crude and blundering
methods of the land-grabbers whose doings provoked the agrarian movement
of the Gracchi. But in essence the system was the same. And it was a
failure, a confessed evil. Why? It is easy to reply that slave-labour
is wasteful; and this is I believe an economic truism. But it is well
to look a little further. Let me begin by quoting from an excellent
book[630] written at a time when this subject was one of immediate
practical interest. ‘The profitableness which has been attributed to
slavery is profitableness estimated exclusively from the point of view
of the proprietor of slaves.... The profits of capitalists may be
increased by the same process by which the gross revenue of a country is
diminished, and therefore the community as a whole may be impoverished
through the very same means by which a portion of its number is enriched.
The economic success of slavery therefore is perfectly consistent with
the supposition that it is prejudicial to the material wellbeing of the
country where it is established.’ These propositions I do not dispute:
I had come to the same conclusion long before I read this passage. I
further admit that in the case of Rome and Italy the community as a whole
was impoverished by the slave-system: it was the constant influx of
tributes from the provinces that kept up the appearance of wealth at the
centre of empire. But whether, in the case of agriculture, the capitalist
landlords were really enriched by the profits of plantation slavery, is
surely a question open to doubt.

Those of them whose capital sunk in great estates and gangs of slaves
brought in only a moderate return, while they were borrowing at a
higher rate of interest, were certainly not the richer for their landed
investments. To keep up a fictitious show of solid wealth for the moment,
they were marching to ruin. But the man who made his income from landed
estates suffice for his needs,—can we say that he was enriched thereby?
Hardly, if he was missing the chance of more remunerative investments
by having his money locked up in land. He made a sacrifice, in order
to gratify a social pride which had in Roman public life a certain
political value. Under the Republic, this political value might be
realized in the form of provincial or military appointments, profitable
through various species of blackmail. But the connexion of such profits
with ownership of great plantations is too remote to concern us here.
A smart country-place, where influential friends could be luxuriously
entertained, was politically more to the point. Now if, as seems
certain, the great plantations were not always (perhaps very seldom
were) a strictly economic success, though protected against Transalpine
competition[631] in wine and oil, can we discern any defects in the
system steadily operating to produce failure?

When we admit that slave-labour is wasteful, we mean that its output as
compared with that of free labour is not proportionate to the time spent.
Having no hope of bettering his condition, the slave does only just
enough to escape punishment; having no interest in the profits of the
work, he does it carelessly. If, as we know, the free worker paid by time
needs constant watching to keep him up to the mark, much more is this
true of the slave. Hence a system of piece-work is disliked by the free
man and hardly applicable in practice to the case of the slave. But we
are not to forget that the slave, having been bought and paid for, draws
no money wage. The interest on his prime cost is on the average probably
much less than a free man’s wage; but the master cannot pay him off and
be rid of him when the job is done. The owned labourer is on his owner’s
hands so long as that owner owns him. Against this we must set the very
low standard of feeding clothing housing etc allowed in the case of the
slave. Nor must we ignore the economic advantage of slavery as ensuring a
permanent supply of labour: for the free labourer was (and is) not always
to be had when wanted. These were pretty certainly the considerations
that underlay the organization described by the Roman writers on _res
rustica_; a regular staff of slaves for everyday work, supplemented by
hired labour at times of pressure or for special jobs. And the growing
difficulty of getting hired help probably furnished the motive for
developing the system of _coloni_. By letting parcels of an estate to
small tenants a landlord could secure the presence of resident freemen
in his neighbourhood. These in their spare time could be employed as
labourers. At how early a date stipulation for labour in part payment of
their rents placed such tenants on a ‘soccage’ footing is not certain.
It has rightly or not, been detected in Columella. At all events it
contained the germ of predial serfdom.

Now, so long as slave-labour was the permanent and vital element in
agriculture, success or failure depended entirely on the efficiency
of direction and control. Accordingly the regular organization of a
great estate was a complete hierarchy. At the head was the _vilicus_,
having under him foremen skilled in special branches of farm work and
head-shepherds and the like. Even among the rank and file of the slaves
many had special duties occupying all or part of their time, for it was
an object to fix responsibility. But it is clear that the efficiency of
the whole organization depended on that of the _vilicus_. And he was a
slave, the chattel of a master who could inflict on him any punishment
he chose. The temptation to rob his master[632] for his own profit was
probably not nearly so strong as we might on first thoughts suppose. If
he had contrived to hoard the fruits of his pilferings in portable cash,
what was he to do with it? He was not free to abscond with it. He would
be well known in the neighbourhood: if any slave could escape detection
as a runaway, it would not be he. And detection meant the loss of all
his privileges as steward, with severe punishment to boot. His obvious
policy was to cling to his stewardship, to induce his master to let him
keep a few beasts of his own (as _peculium_)[633] on some corner of the
estate, and to wait on events. It might be that he looked forward to
manumission after long service. But I cannot find any authority for such
a supposition, or any concrete instance of a manumitted _vilicus_. This
inclines me to believe that in practice to such a man manumission was no
boon. He was in most cases a native of some distant country, where he
had long been forgotten. The farm of his lord was the nearest thing he
had to a home. I am driven to suppose that as a rule he kept his post as
long as he could discharge its duties, and then sank into the position
of a quasi-pensioned retainer who could pay for his keep by watching
his successor. Ordinary slaves when worn out may have been put to light
duties about the farm, care of poultry etc, and he might direct them, so
far as the new steward allowed. I am guessing thus only in reference to
average cases. The brutal simplicity of selling off worn-out slaves for
what they would fetch was apparently not unknown, and is approved[634] by
Cato.

It has been briefly hinted above that the steward’s obvious interest lay
in preventing his master from expecting too much in the way of returns
from the estate. The demand for net income, that is to say the treatment
of agriculture as an investment yielding a steady return year in and year
out, was economically unsound. A landlord in public life wanted a safe
income; interest on good debentures, as we should say. But to guarantee
this some capitalist was needed to take the risks of business, of course
with the prospect of gaining in good years more than he lost in bad ones.
Now the Roman landlord had no such protection. In a business subject to
unavoidable fluctuations he was not only entitled to the profits but
liable to the losses. Imagine him just arrived from Rome, pledged already
to some considerable outlay on shows or simple bribery, and looking for
a cash balance larger than that shewn at the last audit. Let the steward
meet him with a tale of disaster, and conceive his fury. Situations of
this kind must surely have occurred, perhaps not very seldom: and one of
the two men was in the absolute power of the other. We need not imagine
the immediate[635] sequel. Stewards on estates for miles round would be
reminded of their own risks of disgrace and punishment, and would look
to their own security. I suggest that the habitual practice of these
trusted men was to keep the produce of an estate down to a level at
which it could easily be maintained; and, if possible, to represent it
as being even less than it really was. Thus they removed a danger from
themselves. This policy implied an easygoing management of the staff, but
the staff were not likely to resent or betray it. A master like Cato was
perhaps not to be taken in by a device of the kind: but Catos were rare,
and the old man’s advice to look sharply after your _vilicus_ sounds as
if he believed many masters to be habitually fooled by their plausible
stewards. If such was indeed the case, here we have at once a manifest
cause of the decline of agriculture. The restriction of production would
become year by year easier to arrange and conceal, harder and harder to
detect. The employment of freemen[636] as stewards seems not to have been
tried as a remedy; partly perhaps because they would have insisted on
good salaries, partly because they were free to go,—and, if rogues[637],
not empty-handed.

The cause to which I have pointed is one that could continue operating
from generation to generation, and was likely so to continue until such
time as the free farmer should once more occupy the land. The loving care
that agriculture needs could only return with him. It was not lack of
technical knowledge that did the mischief; Varro’s treatise is enough to
prove that. It was the lack of personal devotion in the landlords and
motive in the stewards. Principles without practice failed, as they have
failed and will fail. Nor must we lay much stress on the disturbances of
the revolutionary period. Had these, damaging though they were, been the
effective cause of decline, surely the long peace under the early Empire
would have led to a solid revival. But, though a court poet might sing
of revival to please his master, more serious witnesses tell a different
tale. In the middle of the first century AD we have Lucan Columella
and the elder Pliny. If Lucan’s pictures of the countryside peopled
with slave-gangs, and of the decay of free population, are suspected as
rhetorically overdrawn, at least they agree with the evidence of Livy
in the time of Augustus, so far as the parts near Rome are concerned.
Columella[638] gravely deplores the neglect of agriculture, in particular
the delegation of management to slaves. The landlord and his lady have
long abdicated their interest in what was once a noble pursuit: it is
now a degrading one, and their places are taken by the _vilicus_ and
_vilica_. Yet all he can suggest is a more perfect organization of the
slave-staff, and the letting of outlying farms to tenants. Pliny tells
the same woeful story. And while he vents his righteous indignation on
the _latifundia_ that have ruined Italy, he also mentions instances of
great profits[639] made by cultivators of vines and olives on estates
of quite moderate size. But these successful men were not of the social
aristocracy: they were freedmen or other humble folks who themselves
looked sharply after their own business.

Therefore, when we are told[640], and rightly, that with establishment of
the Empire the political attraction of Rome was lessened, and that the
interest of wealthy landlords became more strictly economic in character,
we must not be in haste to identify this change with a return of genuine
prosperity. That a sort of labour-crisis followed the restoration of
peace is reasonably inferred from the fact that the kidnapping[641] of
freemen, and their incorporation in the slave-gangs of great estates,
was one of the abominations with which the early Principate had to
deal. In a more peaceful world the supply of new slaves fell off, and
the price doubtless rose. It would seem that at the same time free
wage-earners were scarce, as was to be expected after the civil wars. So
the highwayman, probably often a discharged soldier, laid hands on the
unprotected wayfarer. After taking his purse, he made a profit of his
victim’s person by selling him as a slave to some landowner in need of
labourers, who asked no questions. Once in the _ergastulum_ the man had
small chance of regaining his freedom unless and until an inspection of
these private prisons was undertaken by the government. Such phenomena
are not likely to be the inventions of sensational writers; for the
government, heavily weighted with other responsibilities, was driven to
intervene and put down the scandal. But to do this was not to supply the
necessary labour. That problem remained, and in the attempt to solve it
an important development in the organization of large estates seems to
have taken place. While the regular labour was as before furnished by the
slave-staff, and greater care taken[642] to avoid losses by sickness,
and while even the breeding of slaves under certain restrictions was
found worthy of attention, the need of extra hands at certain seasons
was met by an arrangement for retaining potential free labourers within
easy reach. This was an extension of the system of tenant _coloni_.
Parcels of the estate were let to small farmers, whose residence was
thereby assured. Columella[643] advises a landlord in dealing with his
tenants to be more precise in exacting from them work (_opus_) than rent
(_pensiones_), and Weber[644] takes _opus_ to mean not merely the proper
cultivation of their several plots but a stipulated amount of labour on
the lord’s farm. The practice of exacting labour from debtors[645] in
discharge of their debt was not a new one, and this arrangement seems
to be the same in a more systematic form. By taking care to keep the
little farm sufficiently small, and fixing the rent sufficiently high,
the tenant was pretty certain to be often behind with his rent. In such
conditions, even if the tenant did not encumber himself by further
borrowing, it is clear that he was very liable to sink into a ‘soccage’
tenant, bound to render regular services without wage. Nominally free, he
was practically tied to the soil; while the landlord, nominally but the
owner of the soil, gradually acquired what was of more value than a money
rent,—the ownership of his tenant’s services. In the growing scarcity of
slave labour the lord had a strong motive for insisting on his rights,
and so the free worker travelled down the road to serfdom.

In reviewing the history of rustic slavery, and its bearing on the
labour-question, from the end of the second Punic war to the time of
Marcus Aurelius, it is not necessary to refer to every indication of the
discontents that were normal in the miserable slave-gangs. A few actual
outbreaks of which we have definite records will serve to illustrate the
sort of sleeping volcano, ever liable to explode, on which thousands of
Italian landlords were sitting. The writers on agriculture were fully
conscious of the peril, and among various precepts designed to promote
order (and, so far as possible, contentment) none is more significant
than the advice[646] not to have too many slaves of the same race.
Dictated by the desire to make rebellious combinations difficult, this
advice is at least as old as Plato[647] and Aristotle.

So early as 196 BC we hear[648] of a slave-rising in Etruria, put down
with great severity by a military force. In 185 there was a great
rising[649] of slave-herdsmen (_pastores_) in Apulia, put down by the
officer then commanding the SE district. In about another half-century
we begin the series of slave-wars which troubled the Roman world for
some 60 or 70 years and caused a vast destruction of lives and property.
It was the growth of the plantation system under a weak and distracted
government that made such horrors possible. In 139 we hear of a rising
in Sicily, where the plantation system was in full swing. From 135 there
was fierce war[650] in the island, not put down till 131 after fearful
bloodshed. The war of Aristonicus[651] in the new province of Asia, from
132 to 130, seems to have been essentially a slave-war. In Sicily the
old story[652] was repeated 103-99 with the same phenomena and results.
And in the last age of the Republic, 73 to 71 BC, Italy was devastated
by the bands of Spartacus, a joint force of gladiators[653] and rustic
slaves. For many months the country was at their mercy, and their final
destruction was brought about more by their own disunion than by the
sword of Roman legions. It is recorded[654] to the credit of Catiline
that he refused to enlist rustic slaves in the armed force with which
he fought and fell at Pistoria, resisting the less scrupulous advice of
his confederates in Rome. During the upheaval of the great civil wars
the slaves enjoyed unusual license. Many took arms: probably many others
escaped from bondage. But the establishment of the Empire, though the
supply of slave labour was not equal to the demand, did not put an end to
slave-risings. For instance, in 24 AD a former soldier of the Imperial
Guard planned an insurrection[655] in the neighbourhood of Brundisium. By
promising freedom to the bold slave-herdsmen scattered about the Apennine
forests he got together what was evidently a force of considerable
strength. The lucky arrival of a squadron of patrol vessels enabled the
local quaestor to break up the conspiracy before it could make head. But
Tiberius did not dally with so serious a matter: a detachment of troops
carried off the ringleader and his chief accomplices to Rome. Tacitus
remarks that there was in the city a widespread uneasiness, owing to
the enormous growth of slave-gangs while the freeborn population was
declining.

These specimens are enough to illustrate a public danger obvious _a
priori_ and hardly needing illustration. The letter of Tiberius[656] to
the Senate in 22 AD shews how he had brooded over the social and economic
condition of Italy. He saw clearly that the appearance of prosperity in
a country where parks and mansions multiplied, and where tillage was
still giving way to pasturage, was unsound. He knew no doubt that these
signs pointed to the decline of the free rural population as still in
progress. As an experienced general he could hardly ignore the value
of such a free population for recruiting armies to serve the state, or
regard its decline with indifference. He refers to the burden of imperial
responsibilities. Now the system inherited from Augustus set Italy in a
privileged position as the imperial land. Surely Tiberius cannot have
overlooked the corresponding liability of Italy to take a full share in
the defence of the empire. Yet in present circumstances her supply of
vigorous manhood was visibly failing. If the present tendencies continued
to act, the present system would inevitably break down. But, however much
Tiberius was inclined to do justice to the Provinces, he could not escape
his first duty to Italy without a complete change of system: and for this
he was not prepared. Such misgivings of course could not be expressed in
a letter to the Senate; but that an Emperor, temperamentally prone to
worry, did not foresee the coming debility and degradation of Italy, and
fret over the prospect, is to me quite incredible.

The movement for checking luxury, which drew this letter from Tiberius,
resulted according to Tacitus in a temporary reduction of extravagance in
entertainments. The influence of senators brought in from country towns
or the Provinces helped in promoting a simpler life. It was example,
not legislation, that effected whatever improvement was made. It was
the example of Vespasian that did most to reform domestic economy. But
the historian was well aware that reforms depending on the lead of
individuals are transient. We have no reason to believe that any lasting
improvement of agriculture was produced by these fitful efforts. From
stray references in Tacitus, from the letters of the younger Pliny, from
notices in Juvenal and Martial, it is evident that in the great plain
of the Cisalpine and in the Italian hill country farming of one kind or
another went on and prospered. In such districts a real country life
might be found. But this was no new development: it had never ceased. Two
conditions were necessary, remoteness from Rome and difficulty of access,
which often coincided. Estates near the city (_suburbana_) were mostly,
if not in all cases, held as resorts for rest or pleasure. If a steward
could grow a fair supply of farm-produce, so much the better: but the
duty of having all ready for visits of the master and his friends was
the first charge on his time and attention. Even at some considerable
distance from the city the same condition prevailed, if an estate lay
near a main road and thus could be reached without inconvenient exertion.


XXIII. CATO.

The book _de agri cultura_[657] of =M Porcius Cato= (234-149 BC) is a
remarkable work by a remarkable man. It is generally agreed that it
represents his views, though the form in which it has come down to us
has led to differences of opinion as to the degree in which the language
has been modified in transmission. We need only consider some of the
contemporary facts and movements with which Cato was brought into contact
and which affected his mental attitude as a public man. He took part
in the second Punic war, and died just as the third war was beginning:
thus he missed seeing the destruction of the great city which it had
in his later years been his passion to destroy. The success of the
highly organized Punic agriculture is said[658] to have been one of the
circumstances that alarmed his keen jealousy: but we can hardly doubt
that he like others got many a hint from the rustic system of Carthage.
Another of his antagonisms was a stubborn opposition to Greek influences.
In the first half of the second century BC, the time of his chief
activities, these influences were penetrating Roman society more and
more deeply as Roman supremacy spread further and further to the East.
We need not dwell on his denunciations of Greek corruption in general
and warnings against the menace to Roman thrift and simplicity. A good
instance may be found in the injunction[659] to his son, to have nothing
whatever to do with Greek doctors, a pack of rascals who mean to poison
all ‘barbarians,’ who charge fees to enhance the value of their services,
and have the impudence to apply the term ‘barbarians’ to us. The leader
of the good-old-Roman party was at least thorough in his hates. And his
antipathies were not confined to foreigners and foreign ways, but found
ample scope at home in opposition to the newer school of politicians,
whose views were less narrow and hearty than his own.

In Cato’s time the formation of great landed estates, made easy by the
ruin of many peasant farmers in the second Punic war, was in full
swing. The effective government of Rome was passing more and more into
the hands of the Senate, and the leading nobles did not neglect their
opportunities of adding to their own wealth and power. Sharing the
military appointments, they enriched themselves with booty and blackmail
abroad, particularly in the eastern wars: and, being by law excluded from
open participation in commerce, they invested a good part of their gains
in Italian land. From what we learn as to the stale of Italy during the
last century of the Republic, it seems certain that this land-grabbing
process took place chiefly if not wholly in the more accessible parts
of the country, so far as arable lands were concerned. Etruria and the
districts of central Italy near Rome were especially affected, and also
Lucania. Apulia soon became noted for its flocks and herds, which grazed
there in winter and were driven in the summer months to the mountain
pastures of Samnium. The pasturage of great private ‘runs’ (_saltus_) was
thus supplemented by the use of wastes that were still state-property,
and the tendency to monopolize these latter on favourable terms was no
doubt still growing. With the troubles that arose later out of this
system of _possessiones_ we are not here concerned. But the increase
of grazing as compared with tillage is an important point; for that
it was the most paying sort of farming was one of the facts expressly
recognised[660] by Cato. The working of estates on a large scale was
promoted by the plentiful supply of slaves in this period. On arable
lands they were now employed in large gangs, sometimes working in chains,
under slave overseers whose own privileges depended on their getting the
utmost labour out of the common hands. In pastoral districts they enjoyed
much greater freedom. The time was to come when these _pastores_, hardy
ruffians, often armed against wild beasts, would be a public danger. But
for the present it is probable that one of their chief recommendations
was that they cost next to nothing for their keep.

No man knew better than Cato that it was not on such a land-system
as this that Rome had thriven in the past and risen to her present
greatness. He was proud[661] of having worked hard with his own hands in
youth, and he kept up the practice of simple living on his own estate,
sitting down to meals with the slaves[662] whom he ruled with the
strictness of a practical farmer. Around him was going on the extension
of great ill-managed properties owned by men whom political business and
intrigues kept nearly all the year in Rome, and who gave little personal
attention to the farming of their estates. When the landlord rebuilt
his _villa_, and used his new country mansion mainly for entertaining
friends, the real charge of the farm more and more passed to the
plausible slave who was always on the spot as steward. Cato knew very
well that these _vilici_ did not as a rule do the best for their lords.
They had no real interest in getting the most out of the land. The owner,
who wanted ready money for his ambitions and pleasures, was hardly the
man to spend it on material improvements in hope of an eventual increase
of income: thus a steward could easily find excuses for a low standard
of production really due to his own slackness. All this demoralizing
letting-down of agriculture was anathema to the champion of old-Roman
ideas and traditions. It was a grave factor in the luxury and effeminacy
that to his alarm were undermining the solid virtues of the Roman people.
Above all things, it had what to his intensely Roman nature was the
most fatal of defects—it did not pay. Roman nobles were in fact making
their chief profits out of plundering abroad, and ceasing to exercise
old-fashioned economy at home. With the former evil Cato waged open war
as statesman and orator. How he dealt with the latter as a writer on
agriculture I proceed to inquire.

We may classify the several points of view from which agriculture could
be regarded under a few heads, and see what position in relation to
each of these was taken up by Cato. First, as to the scale of farming
operations. He does not denounce great estates. He insists on the
maintenance of a due proportion[663] between the house and the land.
Neither is to be too big for the other. A decent dwelling[664] will
induce the landlord to visit his estate more often; a fine mansion will
be costly and tempt him to extravagance. Secondly, it is on this frequent
personal attention that successful management depends. For your steward
needs the presence of the master’s eye to keep him to his duty. Thirdly,
he accepts the position that the regular staff of labourers are to be
slaves, and some at least of these[665] are in chains (_compediti_). For
special work, in time of harvest etc, extra labour is to be hired, and
of this some is free labour, perhaps not all. For contractors employing
gangs of labourers play a considerable part. Their remuneration may be
in cash, or they may receive a share[666] of the produce (_partiario_).
Some of their labourers are certainly free: if they do not pay the wages
regularly, the _dominus_ is to pay them and recover from the contractor.
But it is not clear that contractors employed freemen exclusively, and
there is some indication[667] of the contrary. Fourthly, there is no
suggestion of a return to quite small peasant holdings, though he opens
the treatise with an edifying passage[668] on the social political and
military virtues of farmers, and cites the traditional description of
_virum bonum_ as being _bonum agricolam bonumque colonum_. For his own
scheme is not one for enabling a poor man to win a living for himself
and family out of a little patch of ground. It is farming for profit;
and, though not designed for a big _latifundium_, it is on a considerable
scale. He contemplates[669] an oliveyard of 240 _iugera_ and a vineyard
of 100 _iugera_, not to mention all the other departments, and the rigid
precepts for preventing waste and getting the most out of everything
are the most striking feature of his book. The first business[670] of
an owner, he says, is not to buy but to sell. Fifthly, it is important
to notice that he does not suggest letting all or part of the estate to
tenants. He starts by giving good advice as to the pains and caution[671]
needed in buying a landed property. But, once bought, he assumes that
the buyer will keep it in hand and farm it for his own account. It has
been said on high authority[672] that the plan of letting farms to
tenant _coloni_ was ‘as old as Italy.’ I do not venture to deny this.
But my inquiry leads me to the conviction that in early times such an
arrangement was extremely rare: the granting of a plot of land during
pleasure (_precario_) by a patron to a client was a very different
thing. Cato only uses the word[673] _colonus_ in the general sense of
_cultivator_, and so far as he is concerned we should never guess that
free tenant farmers were known in Italy. Sixthly, whereas in Varro
and Columella we find the influence of later Greek thought shewn in a
desire to treat even rustic slaves as human and to appeal to the lure
of reward rather than the fear of punishment, to Cato the human chattel
seems on the level of the ox. When past work, both ox and slave are to
be sold[674] for what they will fetch. This he himself says, and his
doctrine was duly recorded by Plutarch as a mark of his hard character.
It is therefore not surprising that he makes no reference to slaves
having any quasi-property (_peculium_) of their own, though the custom of
allowing this privilege was surely well known to him, and was probably
very ancient. If the final fate of the slave was to be sold as rubbish
in order to save his keep, there was not much point in letting him keep
a few fowls or grow a few vegetables in some waste corner of the farm.
But another characteristic story raises some doubt in this matter. We are
told that, having remarked that sexual passion was generally the cause of
slaves getting into mischief, he allowed them[675] to have intercourse
with the female slaves at a fixed tariff. Now, to afford himself this
indulgence, a slave must have had a _peculium_. But Cato did not think it
worth mentioning,—unless of course we assume that a reference has dropped
out of the text. Nor does he refer to manumission: but we hear of his
having a freedman—probably not a farm-slave at all.

Cato’s position, taken as a whole, shews no sign of a reactionary aim,
no uncompromising desire of reversion to a vanished past. Nor does he
fall in with the latest fashion, and treat the huge _latifundium_ as
the last word in landowning. His precepts have in view a fairly large
estate, and perhaps we may infer that he thought this about as much
as a noble landlord, with other calls upon his energies, could farm
through a steward without losing effective control. He does not, like the
Carthaginian Mago, insist on the landlord residing[676] permanently on
the estate. In truth he writes as an opportunist. For this man, who won
his fame as the severest critic of his own times, knew very well that
contemporary Romans of good station and property would never consent
to abdicate their part in public life and settle down to merely rustic
interests. Nor indeed would such retirement have been consistent with
Roman traditions. But conditions had greatly changed since the days of
the farmer-nobles who could easily attend the Senate or Assembly at short
notice. The far greater extent of territory over which modern estates
were spread made it impossible to assume that they all lay near the city.
And yet the attraction of Rome was greater than ever. It was the centre
and head of a dominion already great, and in Cato’s day ever growing. The
great critic might declaim against the methods and effects of this or
that particular conquest and denounce the iniquities of Roman officials:
but he himself bore no light hand in advancing the power of Rome, and
thereby in making Rome the focus of the intrigues and ambitions of the
Mediterranean world. So he accepted the land-system of the new age, and
with it the great extension of slave-labour and slave-management, and
tried to shew by what devotion and under what conditions it could be
made to pay. It must be borne in mind that slave-labour on the land was
no new thing. It was there from time immemorial, ready for organization
on a large scale; and it was this extension of an existing institution
that was new. Agriculture had once been to the ordinary Roman citizen
the means of livelihood. It was now, in great part of the most strictly
Roman districts of Italy, becoming industrialized as a field for
investment of capital by the senatorial class, who practically controlled
the government and were debarred from openly engaging in commerce. The
exploitation of rustic properties as income-producing securities was
merely a new phase of the grasping hard-fisted greed characteristic of
the average Roman. Polybius, observing Roman life in this very age with
Greek eyes, was deeply impressed[677] by this almost universal quality.
And Cato himself was a Roman of Romans. Plutarch[678] has preserved for
us the tradition of his economic career. As a young man of small means
he led the hard life of a farmer, as he was not shy of boasting[679]
in later years, and was a strict master of slaves. But he did not find
farming sufficiently remunerative, so he embarked on other enterprises.
Farming remained rather as a pastime than a source of income: but he took
to safe and steady investments, such as rights over lakes, hot springs,
fullers’ premises, and land that could be turned to profit[680] through
the presence of natural pasture and woodland. From these properties he
drew large returns not dependent on the weather. By employing a freedman
as his agent, he lent money on bottomry, eluding the legal restriction
on senators; and by combining with partners in the transaction he
distributed and so minimized the risks of a most profitable business. And
all through life he dealt in slaves[681], buying them young, training
them, and selling at an enhanced price any that he did not want himself.
He bred some on his estate, probably not many. It is said that, in
addition to her own children, his wife would suckle[682] slave-babies, as
a means of promoting good feeling in the household towards her son.

In these details, of the general truth of which there is no reasonable
doubt, we have a picture of a man of astounding versatility and force:
for of his political and military activities I have said nothing. But
as a writer on agriculture how are we to regard him? Surely not as a
thoroughgoing reformer. His experience had taught him that, if you must
have a good income (a point on which he and his contemporaries were
agreed), you had better not look to get it from farming. But if for
land-pride or other reasons you must needs farm, Cato is ready to give
you the best practical advice. That many (if indeed any) men of property
would take the infinite trouble and pains that his system requires from
a landlord, he was probably too wise to believe. But that was their
business. He spoke[683] as an oracle; as in public life ‘take it or leave
it’ was the spirit of his utterances. The evidence of his life and of
his book, taken together, is more clear as shewing the unsatisfactory
position of rustic enterprise than from any other point of view.

A few details relative to the staff employed on the estate are worthy
of a brief notice. Cato is keenly alive to the importance of the
labour-question. In choosing an estate you must ascertain that there is a
sufficient local supply[684] of labour. On the face of it this seems to
mean free wage-earning labour, though the word _operarius_ is neutral.
But in a notable passage, in which he sets forth the advantage of being
on friendly terms with neighbours (neighbouring landlords), he says
‘Don’t let your household (_familiam_) do damage: if you are in favour
with the neighbourhood, you will find it easier to sell your stock,
easier[685] to get employment for your own staff at a wage, easier to
hire hands: and if you are engaged in building they (the _vicini_) will
give you help in the way of human and animal labour and timber.’ Here we
seem to come upon the hiring, not of free labourers, but of a neighbour’s
slave hands on payment of a rent to their owner. The case would arise
only when some special rough job called for a temporary supply of more
labour. It would be the landlord’s interest to keep his neighbours
inclined to oblige him. Thus by mutual accommodation in times of pressure
it was possible to do with a less total of slaves than if each farm had
had to be provided with enough labour for emergencies. We may also remark
that it made the slaveowner less dependent on free wage-earners, who
would probably have raised their demands when they saw the landlord at
their mercy. It must always be borne in mind that Cato is writing solely
from the landlord’s point of view.

The leading fact relative to the staff is that the steward or head man
(_vilicus_) under whom the various workers, slave or free, are employed
is himself a slave. So too the _vilica_, usually his consort. Their
position is made quite clear by liability to punishment and by their
disqualification[686] from performance of all save the most ordinary
and trivial religious ceremonies. Their duties are defined by jealous
regulations. But in order to keep the steward up to the mark the master
must often visit the estate. It is significant that he is advised on
arrival to make a round of the place[687] without delay, and not to
question his steward until he has thus formed his own impressions
independently. Then he can audit accounts, check stores, listen to
excuses, give orders, and reprimand failure or neglect. That the master
needed to be a man of knowledge and energy in order to make his estate a
source of profit when in charge of a steward, is evident. It may well
be that Cato insists so strongly on the need of these qualities because
they were becoming rare among the nobles of his day. But, though he
knew that the efficiency of a slave steward could only be maintained by
constant and expert watching, he never suggests the employment of a free
man in that capacity. The truth seems to be that the ‘Manager,’ a man
paid by salary or percentage and kept up to the mark by fear of ‘losing
his place,’ is a comparatively modern figure. In antiquity the employment
of Freedmen in positions of trust was a move in that direction, though
patrons kept a considerable hold, beyond the purely economic one, on
their freedmen. But for charge of a farm Cato does not suggest employment
of a freedman.

The blending of free and slave labour might well have been brought
out more clearly than it is: but to the author writing for his own
contemporaries it would seem needless to enlarge upon a condition which
everyone took for granted. Yet there are passages where it is indicated
plainly enough. Thus in the olive-press room a bed is provided[688]
for two free _custodes_ (apparently foremen) out of three: the third,
a slave, is put to sleep with the _factores_, who seem to be the hands
employed[689] to work the press, probably slaves, whose labour is merely
bodily exertion. The _leguli_ who gather up the olives are probably free,
for they are interested[690] in making the amount so gathered as large as
possible. Strippers, _strictores_, who pluck the olives from the tree,
are also mentioned[691] in the chapter dealing with the harvesting of a
hanging crop by a contractor. As the need of care to avoid damaging the
trees is insisted on, and all the workers are to take a solemn oath[692]
that they have stolen none of the crop, we may fairly infer that they
are freemen. When the process of manufacture is let to a contractor,
his _factores_ are to take a similar oath, and are probably free. So
too when a crop is sold hanging: if the buyer neglects to pay[693] his
_leguli_ and _factores_ (which would cause delay) the landlord may pay
them himself and recover the amount from the buyer. On the other hand in
the grazing department the underlings are slaves. In case of the sale of
winter grazing, provision is made[694] for an arbitration for settlement
of damages done by the _emptor aut pastores aut pecus emptoris_ to the
_dominus_, or by the _dominus aut familia aut pecus_ to the _emptor_.
And, until the compensation awarded is paid, the _pecus aut familia_ on
the ground is to be held in pledge by the party to whom compensation
is due. This would generally be the landlord, and the _familia_ of the
_emptor_ would be his _pastores_. Even so, when a speculator buys the
season’s lambs, he provides a _pastor_ for two months, and the man is
held in pledge[695] by the landlord until the account is finally settled.

There are casual references to other persons employed on the estate
whose condition has to be inferred from various indications with more
or less certainty. Thus the _capulator_, who draws off the oil from
the press into vessels, is connected with the _custos_[696] and is not
clearly distinct from him. He may be a slave, but the call for strict
cleanliness and care at this stage of the operations rather suggests
the free wage-earner. An _epistates_ is mentioned[697] in a chapter
on food-rations (_familiae cibaria_), and grouped with the _vilicus_
and _vilica_ and the _opilio_. They receive less food than the common
hands engaged in rough manual labour. They are probably all slaves, the
_epistates_ being a foreman of some sort, and the _opilio_ the head
shepherd, the _magister pecoris_ of whom we often hear later. In the
estimates[698] of the equipment required for a farm with oliveyard or
vineyard the human staff is included with the other live and dead stock.
The _operarii_ mentioned in this connexion are evidently slave hands, and
the _bubulcus[699] subulcus asinarius opilio_ and _salictarius_ are the
same, only specialized in function. For an oliveyard of 240 _iugera_ the
human staff is put at 13 (_summa homines xiii_), for a vineyard of 100
_iugera_ it is 16, and the _operarii_ in particular are 10 as against
5. The greater amount of digging[700] needed on a farm chiefly devoted
to vines is the reason of the difference. These estimates are for the
permanent staff, the _familia_, owned by the landlords in the same way as
the oxen asses mules sheep goats or pigs. So far as common daily labour
is concerned, this staff should make the farm self-sufficing.

But there were many operations, connected with the life of the farm,
for performing which it was either not desirable or not possible to
rely on the regular staff. It would never have paid to maintain men
skilled in the work of special trades only needed on rare occasions.
Thus for erecting buildings the _faber_[701] is called in: the landlord
finds materials, the builder uses them and is paid for his work. Lime
is needed for various purposes, and it may be worth while[702] to
have a kiln on the estate and do the burning there. But even so it is
well to employ a regular limeburner (_calcarius_) for the job. The
landlord finds limestone and fuel, and a way of payment is to work on
shares (_partiario_) each party taking his share of the lime. The same
share-system (according to Keil’s text) is proposed for the operation
known as _politio_, which seems to include[703] weeding and ‘cleaning’
of the land, at least for cereal crops, and also is prescribed for the
skilled tending of a vineyard. For such works as these it is fairly
certain that the persons employed were assumed to be living in the
neighbourhood. In the case of the blacksmith[704] (_faber ferrarius_)
there can be no doubt, for his forge is spoken of as a fit place for
drying grapes, hung presumably in the smoke of his wood fire. Now all
these skilled men are evidently free, and work on agreed terms. Some of
them are certainly not singlehanded, but whether their underlings are
freemen or slaves or both we are left to guess. In all cases their work
is such as calls not only for skill and industry but also for good faith,
which cannot be expected from slaves. It is in short contract-work,
whether the bargain be made in a formal agreement or not.

The employment of contractors, each with his own staff, at times
of pressure such as the getting in and disposal of crops, has been
referred to above, and it has been remarked that some at least of this
emergency-labour was performed by freemen. We must therefore conclude
that in Cato’s time there was a considerable supply of casual labourers
in country districts, on whose services landlords could rely. The
contractor would seem to have been either a ‘ganger’ who bargained for
terms with the landlord on behalf of his work-party, or a capitalist
owning a gang of slaves. What made the difference would be the nature
of the job in hand, according as skill or mere brute strength was
chiefly required. But that slave labour was the essential factor, on
which Catonian agriculture normally depended, is beyond all doubt. The
slave steward is not only responsible[705] for the control of the slave
staff (_familia_) and their wellbeing and profitable employment. He is
authorized to employ other labour, even free labour, at need; only he
must not keep such persons hanging about the place. He is to pay them
off and discharge them without delay, no doubt in order to prevent them
from unsettling the slaves by their presence. And slaves must never
be idle. When a master calls his steward to account for insufficient
results on the farm, the latter is expected to plead in excuse not only
the weather but shortage of hands; slaves have been sick or have run
away; or they have been employed[706] on state-work (_opus publicum
effecisse_),—probably in mending the roads, for this is recognized below.


XXIV. AGRICULTURE IN THE REVOLUTIONARY PERIOD.

From the death of Cato in 149 BC to the date of Varro’s book _de re
rustica_ (about 37 BC) is a space of more than a century. The one great
fact of this momentous period in relation to agriculture is the public
recognition of the decay of the small farmers over a large part of
Italy, and the vain attempt to revive a class well known to have been
the backbone of Roman strength. But the absorption of small holdings in
large estates had already gone so far in the affected districts that
there was practically only one direction in which land-reformers could
move. To confiscate private property was forbidden by Roman respect for
legal rights: it appears in Roman history only after the failure of the
Gracchan movement, and as a phenomenon of civil war. There were however
great areas of land of which the state was still in law proprietor,
held by individuals (often in very large blocks) under a system of
recognized occupation known as _possessio_. Tradition alleged that in
Rome’s early days this _ager publicus_ had been a cause of quarrels
between the needy Commons who hungered for land and the rich nobles who
strove to monopolize the land annexed by war and now state-property. It
was known that one of the effects produced by the political equalization
of the Orders in the fourth century BC had been legislation to restrain
land-monopoly. But the Licinian laws of 367 BC had not made an end of the
evil. Soon evaded, they had become in course of time wholly inoperative.
The new Patricio-Plebeian nobility quieted the claims of the poor by
colonial foundations and allotments of land in newly-conquered districts,
while they continued to enrich themselves by ‘possession’ of the public
land. Undisturbed possession gradually obscured the distinction between
such holdings and the estates held in full ownership as _ager privatus_.
Boundaries were confused: mixed estates changed hands by inheritance
or sale without recognition of a legal difference in the tenure of
different portions: where improvements had been carried out, they applied
indistinguishably to lands owned or possessed. The greater part of these
_possessiones_ was probably not arable but pasture, grazed by numerous
flocks and herds in charge of slave herdsmen. Now in Cato’s time the
imports of foreign corn were already rendering the growth of cereal crops
for the market an unremunerative enterprise in the most accessible parts
of Italy. Grazing paid better. It required fewer hands, but considerable
capital and wide areas of pasturage. It could be combined with the
culture of the vine and olive; for the live-stock, brought down to the
farmstead in the winter months, supplied plentiful manure. Moreover, the
wholesale employment of slaves enabled a landlord to rely on a regular
supply of labour. The slave was not liable to military service: so the
master was not liable to have his staff called up at short notice. In
short, economic influences, aided by selfish or corrupt administration of
the laws under the rule of the nobility, gave every advantage to the rich
landlords. No wonder that patriotic reformers viewed the prospect with
alarm, and sought some way of promoting a revival of the peasant farmers.

The story of the Gracchan movement and the causes of its failure are
set forth from various points of view in histories[707] of Rome and
special monographs. What concerns us here is to remark that its remedial
legislation dealt solely with land belonging to the state and occupied
by individuals. Power was taken to ascertain its boundaries, to resume
possession on behalf of the state, and to parcel it out in allotments
among needy citizens. How far success in the aim of restoring a free
citizen population in the denuded districts was ever possible, we cannot
tell. But we know that it did not in fact succeed. By 111 BC whatever had
been achieved[708] was finally annulled. The bulk of the _ager publicus_
had disappeared. The sale of land-allotments, at first forbidden, had
been permitted, and the process of buying out the newly created peasantry
went on freely. But large estates formed under the new conditions were
subject to no defect of title. They were strictly private property,
though the term _possessiones_ still remained in use. Slave-labour on
such estates was normal as before. Indeed rustic slavery was now at its
height. This short period of attempted land-reform comes between the two
great Sicilian slave-wars (135-2 and 103-99 BC), in the events of which
the horrors of contemporary agriculture were most vividly expressed. It
was also a time of great wars abroad, in Gaul, in Africa, and against the
barbarian invaders from the North. Roman armies suffered many defeats,
and the prestige of Roman power was only restored by the military
remodelling under Marius. When Marius finally threw over the principle
that military service was a duty required of propertied citizens, and
raised legions from the poorest classes, volunteering with an eye to
profit, he in effect founded the Empire. We can hardly help asking[709]
from what quarters he was able to draw these recruits. Some no doubt
were idlers already living in Rome attracted by the distributions of
cheap corn provided by the Government in order to keep quiet the city
mob. But these can hardly have been a majority of the recruits of this
class. Probably a number came in from rural districts, hearing that
Marius was calling for volunteers and prepared to disregard altogether
the obsolete rules which had on occasion been evaded by others before
him. It is perhaps not too bold a conjecture to suggest that the casual
wage-earners, the _mercennarii_ referred to by Cato, were an important
element in the New Model army of Marius. This landless class, living from
hand to mouth, may have been declining in numbers, but they were by no
means extinct. We meet them later in Varro and elsewhere. And no man knew
better than Marius the military value of men hardened by field-labour,
particularly when led to volunteer by hopes of earning a higher reward in
a career of more perils and less monotony.

It can hardly be supposed that agriculture throve under the conditions
prevailing in these troubled years. The tendency must have been to
reduce the number of free rustic wage-earners, while each war would
bring captives to the slave-market. We can only guess at these economic
effects. The following period of civil wars, from the Italian rising in
90 BC to the death of Sulla in 78, led to a further and more serious
disturbance of the land-system. The dictator had to reward his soldiery,
and that promptly. The debt was discharged by grants of land, private
land, the owners of which were either ejected for the purpose or had been
put to death. Of the results of this wholesale confiscation and allotment
we have abundant evidence, chiefly from Cicero. Making full allowance for
exaggeration and partisan feeling, it remains sufficient to shew that
Sulla’s military colonists were economically a disastrous failure, while
both they and the men dispossessed to make room for them soon became a
grave political danger. The discharged soldiers desired an easy life as
proprietors, and the excitements of warfare had unfitted them for the
patient economy of farming. They bought slaves; but slaves cost money,
and the profitable direction of slave-labour was an art calling for a
degree of watchfulness and skill that few landlords of any class were
willing or able to exert. So this substitution of new landowners for old
was an unmixed evil: the new men failed as farmers, and we hardly need to
be told that the feeling of insecurity produced by the confiscations was
a check on agricultural improvements for the time. Those of the ‘Sullan
men’ who sold their allotments (evading the law) would certainly not get
a good price, and the money would soon melt away.

It will be seen that the old Roman system, under which the ordinary
citizen was a peasant farmer who served the state as a soldier when
needed, was practically at an end. Compulsory levies were on certain
occasions resorted to, for no abolition of the old liability to
service had taken place: but voluntary enlistment of young men, and
their conversion into professional soldiers by technical training, was
henceforth the normal method of forming Roman armies. Armies were kept on
foot for long campaigns, and the problem of their peaceful disbandment
was one of the most serious difficulties of the revolutionary age. The
treasury had no large income to spend on money-pensions, so the demand
for allotments of land became a regular accompaniment of demobilization.
Meanwhile the desperate condition of landlords in important districts,
and the danger from the slave-gangs, were forcibly illustrated in the
rising under Spartacus (73-1 BC) and the Catilinarian conspiracy. It
is unfortunate that the scope of the land-bill of Rullus[710] in 63,
defeated by Cicero, is uncertain, and the effect of Caesar’s land-law of
59 hardly less so. But one thing seems clear. In default of sufficient
lands suitable for allotment, legislators were driven to propose the
resumption of the rich Campanian domain. This public estate had long
been let to tenants, real farmers, in small holdings; and the rents
therefrom were one of the safest sources of public income. To disturb
good tenants, and give the best land in Italy to untried men as owners,
was surely a bad business. It shews to what straits rulers were driven
to find land for distribution. To enter into the details of the various
land-allotments between the abortive proposal of Rullus and the final
settlement of Octavian would be out of place here. But it is well to note
that the plan of purchasing private land for pension-allotments, proposed
in the bill of Rullus, was actually carried out by the new Emperor and
proudly recorded[711] by him in his famous record of the achievements
of his life. The violent transfer of landed properties from present
holders to discharged soldiers of the triumviral armies had evidently
been both an economic failure and a political evil. To pay for estates
taken for purpose of distribution was a notable step towards restoration
of legality and public confidence. Whether it immediately brought about a
revival of agriculture on a sound footing is a question on which opinions
may justifiably differ. Much will depend on the view taken by this or
that inquirer of the evidence of Varro and the Augustan poets Horace and
Vergil.

    NOTE—In Prendergast’s _Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland_
    (ed 2, 1870), chapter IV a, much interesting matter may be
    found. Cruel expulsions, corrupt influences, and the sale of
    their lots by soldiers to officers, their frequent failure
    as cultivators, etc, stand out clearly. The analogy to the
    Roman cases must of course not be too closely pressed, as the
    conditions were not identical.


XXV. VARRO.

=M Terentius Varro= wrote his treatise _de re rustica_ in 37-6 BC at the
age of 80. The subject was only one of an immense number to which he
devoted his talents and wide learning when not actively engaged in public
duties. The last republican rally under Brutus and Cassius had failed at
Philippi in 42, and the Roman world was shared out between the Triumvirs.
In 36 the suppression of Lepidus declared what was already obvious,
that Antony and Octavian were the real holders of power and probable
rivals. Proscriptions, confiscations, land-allotments to soldiers, the
wars with Antony’s brother Lucius and the great Pompey’s son Sextus, had
added to the unsettlement and exhaustion of Italy. If it appeared to
Varro that a treatise on farming would be opportune (and we may fairly
conjecture that it did), there was surely much to justify his opinion in
the distressful state of many parts of the country. But at this point
we are met by a passage[712] in the work itself which seems to prove
that he took a very different view of present agricultural conditions
in Italy. Some of the speakers (the book is in form a dialogue) declare
that no country is better cultivated than Italy, that no other country
is so fully cultivated all through (_tota_), that Italian crops are in
general the best of their several kinds, and in particular that Italy
is one great orchard. Instances in point are given. That Varro, like
Cicero, took great care[713] to avoid anachronisms and improbabilities,
that his characters are real persons, and that he tries hard to fit the
several topics to the several characters, is not to be denied. But it
is perhaps too much to assume that such general remarks as those just
cited are meant to represent the known personal opinions of the speakers.
If we could be sure of the date at which the dialogue is supposed to
be held, we might have a more satisfactory standard for estimating the
significance and historical value of these utterances. Unluckily we
have no convincing evidence as to the intended date. The scene of the
second book can be laid in 67 BC with reasonable certainty, and that of
the third in 54 BC. But no passage occurs in the first book sufficient
to furnish material for a like inference. When Stolo refers[714] to
Varro’s presence with the fleet and army at Corcyra, some have thought
that he has in mind the time of the civil war in 49 BC. It is much more
likely that the reference is to Varro’s service[715] as one of Pompey’s
lieutenants in the pirate war of 67 BC. The dialogue of Book I would then
be placed after the summer of that year, probably not much later. The
boast of the speakers as to the splendid cultivation of Italy in general
would refer to the time when the disturbance caused by the confiscations
and assignations of Sulla was dying down and the rising of Spartacus had
lately been suppressed. It would be placed before the later disturbances
caused by measures designed to satisfy the claims of Pompeian Caesarian
and Triumviral armies. Vergil had not yet been driven from his Cisalpine
farm.

Whether by placing Book I in this interval, and by supposing that
the circumstances of that time would fit the utterances of Varro’s
characters, I am exceeding the limits of sober guesswork, I cannot judge.
But I am convinced that in any case upland pastures and forest-lands[716]
accounted for a very large part of the surface of Italy then, as they do
still. Indeed Varro recognizes this in his references to the migration
of flocks and herds according to the seasons, and particularly when he
notes not only the great stretches of rough land to be traversed but also
the need of active and sturdy _pastores_ able to beat off the assaults
of wild beasts and robbers. Surely the complete cultivation of Italy,
compared as it is with that of other countries, is a description not
to be taken literally, but as a natural exaggeration in the mouth of a
self-complacent Roman agriculturist. Be this as it may, the treatise
marks a great advance on that of Cato in some respects. Many details
are common to both writers, in particular the repeated insistence on
the main principle that whatever the farmer does must be made to pay.
Profit, not sentiment or fancy, was their common and truly Roman aim. But
in the century or more that had elapsed since Cato wrote other authors
(such as Saserna) had treated of farming, and much had been learnt from
Greek and Punic authorities. Knowledge of the products and practices of
foreign lands had greatly increased, and Varro, who had himself added to
this store, made free use of the wider range of facts now at the service
of inquirers. And the enlarged outlook called for a systematic method.
Accordingly Varro’s work is clearly divided into three discussions, of
tillage (Book I), grazing and stock-breeding (II), and keeping fancy
animals (III) chiefly to supply the market for table-luxuries. And he
goes into detail in a spirit different from that of Cato. Cato jerked out
dogmatic precepts when he thought fit, for instance his wonderful list of
farm-requisites. Varro is more concerned with the principles, the reasons
for preferring this or that method, derived from the theories and
experience of the past. For instance, in estimating the staff required,
he insists[717] on its being proportioned to the scale of the work to be
done: as the average day’s work (_opera_) varies in efficiency according
to the soil, it is not possible to assign a definite number of hands to
a farm of definite area. Nor is he content simply to take slave-labour,
supplemented by hired free labour and contract-work, for granted. In
a short but important passage he discusses the labour-question, with
reasons for the preference of this or that class of labour for this
or that purpose, of course preferring whichever is likely to give the
maximum of profit with the minimum of loss.

It is this passage[718] that is chiefly of interest from my present point
of view, and I will therefore translate it in full.

‘So much for the four conditions[719] of the farm that are connected
with the soil, and the second four external to the farm but bearing on
its cultivation. Now for the appliances used in tillage. Some classify
these under two heads (_a_) men (_b_) the implements necessary for their
work. Others under three[720] heads (_a_) the possessed of true speech
(_b_) the possessed of inarticulate speech (_c_) the speechless. In these
classes respectively are included[721] (_a_) slaves (_b_) oxen (_c_)
waggons, and such are the three kinds of equipment. The men employed
in all tillage are either slaves or freemen or both. Free labour is
seen in the case of those who till their[722] land themselves, as poor
peasants[723] with the help of their families mostly do: or in that of
wage-earners[724], as when a farmer hires free hands to carry out the
more important operations on his farm, vintage or hay-harvest and the
like: such also are those who were called “tied men”[725] in Italy, a
class still numerous in Asia Egypt and Illyricum. Speaking of these[726]
as a class, I maintain that in the tillage of malarious land[727] it pays
better to employ free wage-earners than slaves; even in a healthy spot
the more important operations, such as getting in vintage or harvest,
are best so managed. As to their qualities, Cassius writes thus: in
buying[728] labourers you are to choose men fit for heavy work, not less
than 22 years of age and ready to learn farm-duties. This you can infer
from giving them other tasks and seeing how they perform them, or by
questioning[729] new slaves as to the work they used to do under their
former owner. Slaves should be neither timid nor high-spirited. Their
overseers[730] should be men able to read and write, in fact with a touch
of education, honest fellows, somewhat older than the mere labourers
just mentioned. For these are more willing to obey their elders. Above
all things the one indispensable quality in overseers is practical
knowledge of farming. For the overseer is not only to give orders, but
to take part in carrying them out; so that the slave may do as he sees
the overseer do, and note the reasonableness of his own subordination to
one his superior in knowledge. On the other hand the overseer should not
be allowed to enforce obedience by the lash rather than by reprimand,—of
course supposing that the same effect[731] is produced. Again, you should
not buy too many slaves of the same race, for nothing breeds trouble in
the household[732] more than this. For the overseers there should be
rewards to make them keen in their work: care should be taken to allow
them a private store[733] and slave concubines to bear them children, a
tie which steadies them and binds them more closely to the estate. It is
these family ties that distinguish the slave-gangs from Epirus and give
them a high market-value. You should grant favours to overseers to gain
their goodwill, and also to the most efficient of the common hands; with
these it is also well to talk over the work that is to be undertaken,
for it makes them think that their owner takes some account of them and
does not utterly despise them. They can be given more interest in their
work by more generous treatment in the way of food or clothing, or by
a holiday or by leave to keep a beast or so of their own at grass on
the estate, or other privileges: thus any who have been overtasked or
punished may find some comfort[734] and recover their ready goodwill
towards their owner.’

This passage well illustrates the advance in scientific treatment of
the subject since the time of Cato. The analysis and classification may
not be very profound, but it tends to orderly method, not to oracles.
The influence of Greek writings is to be traced, for instance in the
rules for the choice and treatment of slaves. The writings of Aristotle
and his school had been studied in Rome since the great collection had
been brought by Sulla from the East. How far Varro actually borrows from
Aristotle or Plato or Xenophon is not always easy to say. The advice to
avoid getting too many slaves of one race or too spirited, and to use
sexual relations as a restraining tie, were by this time common-places
of slave-management, and appear under Cato in somewhat cruder practical
forms. But Varro is involved in the difficulties that have ever beset
those who try to work on double principles, to treat the slave as at
once the chattel of an owner and a partner in common humanity. So he
tells his reader ‘manage your slaves as men, if you can get them to obey
you on those terms; if not,—well, you must make them obey—flog them.’
Humanitarian principles have not gone far in the system of Varro, who
looks solely from the master’s point of view. The master gets rather
more out of his slaves when they work to gain privileges than when they
work merely to escape immediate punishment. So he is willing to offer
privileges, and the prospect of promotion to the higher ranks of the
staff. Overseers and the best of the common hands may form a little
quasi-property of their own by the master’s leave. But these _peculia_
do not seem to be a step on the road to manumission, of which we hear
nothing in this treatise. We are left to infer that rustic slaves on
estates generally remained there when past active work, tolerated
hangers-on, living on what they could pick up, and that to have acquired
some _peculium_ was a comfortable resource in old age. In short, the
hopes of the worn-out rustic bondman were limited indeed.

When we note Varro’s attitude towards free labour we cannot wonder that
humanitarianism is not conspicuous in his treatment of slavery. Hired
men are more to be trusted than slaves, so you will employ them, as Cato
advised, for jobs that need care and honesty and that cannot wait. But he
adds a sinister hint as to employing them on work dangerous to health.
Your own slaves for whom you have paid good money are too valuable to be
exposed to such risks. The great merit of the _mercennarius_ is that,
when the job is done and his wage paid, you have done with him and have
no further responsibility. This brutally industrial view is closely
connected with the legal atmosphere of Roman civilization, in which
Varro lived and moved. The debtor discharging his debt by serving his
creditor as a farm-hand, once an ordinary figure in Italy, was now only
found abroad: Varro mentions this unhappy class, for he is not thinking
of Italy alone. It is interesting to hear from him that peasant-farmers
were not extinct in Italy. But we are not told whether they were still
numerous or whether they were mostly to be found in certain districts, as
from other authorities we are tempted to infer. Nor do we learn whether
men with small farms of their own often went out as wage-earners; nor
again whether landless _mercennarii_ were in his time a numerous class.
These omissions make it very difficult for us to form any clear and
trustworthy picture of rural conditions as they presented themselves to
Varro. It would seem that they were in general much the same as in Cato’s
time, but that Varro is more inclined to discuss openly some details
that Cato took for granted. So in his turn Varro takes some things for
granted, passing lightly over details that we cannot but wish to know.

There is however one important matter, ignored by Cato (at least in
his text as we have it), to which reference is found in Varro. It is
the presence of the free tenant farmer (_colonus_) in the agricultural
system of Italy. He tells us that the formal lease[735] of a farm
usually contained a clause by which the _colonus_ was forbidden to graze
a she-goat’s offspring on the farm. In another passage[736] the same
prohibition is mentioned, but with this limitation, that it applies only
to land planted with immature saplings. So poisonous were the teeth of
nibbling goats thought to be. The restriction imposed on the tenant
suggests that the landlord was bargaining at an advantage; the lessor
could dictate his terms to the lessee. That the tenant farmers of this
period were at least in some cases humble dependants of their landlords
is clearly shewn by a passage[737] of Caesar. In order to hold Massalia
for Pompey in 49 BC, Domitius raised a squadron of seven ships, the crews
for which he made up from his own[738] slaves freedmen and tenants. Soon
after he refers to this force[739] as the tenants and herdsmen brought
by Domitius. These herdsmen are no doubt some of the slaves before
mentioned. It is evident that the free retainers called tenants are not
conceived as having much choice in the matter when their noble lord
called them out for service. Probably their effective freedom consisted
in the right to own property (if they could get it), to make wills, to
rear children of their own, and other like privileges. But their landlord
would have so great a hold[740] on them that, though in theory freemen,
they were in practice compelled to do his bidding. In later times we
shall find the tenant farmer a common figure in rural life, but very
dependent on his landlord; and it is by no means clear that his position
had ever been a strong and independent one. Of Varro all we can say is
that he does refer to farm-tenancy as a business-relation, and infer from
his words that in that relation the landowner had the upper hand.

Beside what we may call the legal sense of ‘tenant,’ Varro also uses
_colonus_ in its older sense of ‘cultivator.’ In discussing the
convenience of being able to supply farm needs, and dispose of farm
surplus, in the neighbourhood, he points out that the presence or absence
of this advantage may make all the difference whether a farm can be
made to pay or not. For instance, it is seldom worth while to keep
skilled craftsmen[741] of your own: the death of one such specialist
sweeps away the (year’s) profit of the farm. Only rich landowners can
provide for such services in their regular staff. So the usual practice
of _coloni_ is to rely on local men for such services, paying a yearly
fee and having a right to their attendance at call. The _coloni_ here
are simply ‘farmers,’ and there is nothing to shew that they do not own
their farms. The connexion with the verb _colere_ appears even more
strongly where _pastor_ is contrasted[742] with _colonus_, grazier with
tiller: and in that passage the _colonus_ is apparently identical with
the _dominus fundi_ just below. The _coloni_ of these passages can hardly
be mere tenants, but on the other hand they are certainly not great
landowners. They seem to be men farming their own land, but in a small
way[743] of business. Whether there were many such people in Varro’s
Italy, he does not tell us. Nor do we find any indication to shew whether
they would normally take part in farm work with their own hands. When
he deplores[744] the modern tendency to crowd into the city, where men
use their hands for applauding shows, having abandoned the sickle and
the plough, he is merely repeating the common lament of reformers. There
is no sign of any hope of serious reaction against this tendency: the
importation and cheap distribution of foreign corn is a degenerate and
ruinous policy, but there it is. Varro admired the small holdings and
peasant farmers of yore, but no man knew better that independent rustic
citizens of that type had passed away from the chief arable districts of
Italy never to return.

That small undertakings were still carried on in the neighbourhood of
Rome and other urban centres, is evident from the market-gardens of the
Imperial age. A notable case[745] is that of the bee-farm of a single
_iugerum_ worked at a good profit by two brothers about 30 miles north of
Rome. Varro expressly notes that they were able to bide their time so as
not to sell on a bad market. He had first-hand knowledge of these men,
who had served under him in Spain. Clearly they were citizens. They can
hardly have kept slaves. It seems to have been a very exceptional case,
and to be cited as such: it is very different from that of the peasant
farmer of early Rome, concerned first of all to grow food for himself and
his family. Agriculture as treated by Varro is based on slave labour, and
no small part of his work deals with the quarters, feeding, clothing,
discipline, sanitation, and mating, of the slave staff. True to his
legal bent, he is careful to safeguard the rights of the slaveowner by
explaining[746] the formal details necessary to effect a valid purchase,
with guarantee of bodily soundness, freedom from vice, and flawless
title. Again, to keep slaves profitably it was urgently necessary to keep
them constantly employed, so that the capital sunk in them should not lie
idle and the hands lose the habit of industry. Therefore, while relying
on local craftsmen for special skilled services occasionally needed,
he insists that a number of rustic articles should be manufactured on
the farm. ‘One ought not to buy anything that can be produced on the
estate[747] and made up by the staff (_domesticis_ = _familia_), such as
wicker work and things made of rough wood.’ Moreover, the organization
of the staff in departments is an elaborate slave-hierarchy. Under the
general direction of the _vilicus_, each separate function of tillage or
grazing, or keeping and fattening fancy-stock has its proper foreman.
Such posts carried little privileges, and were of course tenable during
good behaviour. Some foremen would have several common hands under
them: none would wish to be degraded back to the ranks. It seems that
some wealthy men kept[748] birdcatchers huntsmen or fishermen of their
own, but Varro, writing for the average landlord, seems to regard these
as being properly free professionals. As for the common hands, the
‘labourers’ (_operarii_), on whose bone and sinew the whole economic
structure rested, their condition was much the same as in Cato’s time,
but apparently somewhat less wretched. Varro does not propose to sell
off worn-out slaves; this let us credit to humaner feelings. He shews a
marked regard for the health and comfort of slaves; this may be partly
humanity, but that it is also due to an enlightened perception of the
owner’s interest is certain. He does not provide for an _ergastulum_,
though those horrible prisons were well known in his day. Why is this?
Perhaps partly because slave-labour was no longer normally employed on
estates in the extremely crude and brutal fashion that was customary in
the second century BC. And partly perhaps owing to the great disturbances
of land-tenure since the measures of the Gracchi and the confiscations of
Sulla. The earlier _latifundia_ had been in their glory when the wealthy
nobles sat securely in power, and this security was for the present at
an end. But, if the slave _operarii_ were somewhat better treated, their
actual field labour was probably no less hard. Many pieces of land could
not be worked with the clumsy and superficial plough then in use. Either
the slope of the ground forbade it, or a deeper turning of the soil was
needed, as for growing[749] vines. This meant wholesale digging, and
the slave was in effect a navvy without pay or respite. No wonder that
_fossor_ became a proverbial term for mere animal strength and dull
unadaptability. An interesting estimate of the capability of an average
digger is quoted[750] from Saserna. One man can dig over 8 _iugera_ in 45
days. But 4 day’s work is enough for one _iugerum_ (about ⅝ of an acre).
The 13 spare days allowed are set to the account[751] of sickness, bad
weather, awkwardness, and slackness. Truly a liberal margin to allow for
waste. It cannot have been easy to farm at a profit with slave-labour
on such terms; for the slave’s necessary upkeep was, however meagre, a
continual charge.

And yet we do not find Varro suggesting that free wage-earning labour
might in the long run prove more economical than slave-labour even for
rough work. Nay more, he does not refer to the employment of contractors
with their several gangs, each interested in getting his particular
job done quickly and the price paid. He only refers to _mercennarii_
in general terms, as we saw above. Nor does he speak[752] of _politio_
as a special process, as Cato does. It may be that he did not think it
worth while to enter into these topics. But it is more probable that the
results of agrarian legislation and civil warfare in the revolutionary
period had affected the problems of rustic labour. The attempt to revive
by law the class of small cultivating owners had been a failure. Military
service as a career had competed with rustic wage-earning. Men waiting
to be hired as farm hands were probably scarce. Otherwise, how can we
account for the great armies raised in those days? To refer once more to
a point mentioned above, Varro does not suggest that the charge of an
estate might with advantage be entrusted to a freeman as _vilicus_. That
we can discover all the reasons for the preference of slaves as stewards
is too much to hope for. That it seemed to be a guarantee of honesty and
devotion to duty, the manager being wholly in his master’s power, is a
fairly certain guess. And yet Varro like others saw the advisability of
employing free labour for occasional work of importance. Perhaps the
permanent nature of a steward’s responsibilities had something to do with
the preference. It may well have been difficult to keep a hold on a free
manager. In management of a slave staff no small tact and intelligence
were needed as well as a thorough knowledge of farming. General
experience needed to be supplemented by an intimate knowledge[753] of
the conditions of the neighbourhood and the capacities of the particular
estate. And a free citizen, whose abilities and energy might qualify
him for management of a big landed estate, had endless opportunities
of turning his qualities to his own profit elsewhere. Whether as
individuals or in companies, enterprising Romans found lucrative openings
in the farming of revenues, in state-contracts, in commerce, or in
money-lending, both in Italy and in the Provinces. Such employments,
compared with a possible estate-stewardship, would offer greater personal
independence and a prospect of larger gains. And freemen of a baser and
less effective type would have been worse than useless: certainly far
inferior to well-chosen slaves.


XXVI. CICERO.

It is hardly possible to avoid devoting a special section to the evidence
of =Cicero=, though it must consist mainly of noting a number of isolated
references to particular points. With all his many country-houses, his
interest in agriculture was slight. But his active part in public life
of all kinds makes him a necessary witness in any inquiry into the facts
and feelings of his time; though there are few witnesses whose evidence
needs to be received with more caution, particularly in matters that
offer opportunity for partisanship. For our present purpose this defect
does not matter very much. It is chiefly as confirming the statements of
others that his utterances will be cited.

When we reflect that Cicero was himself a man of generous instincts, and
that he was well read in the later Greek philosophies, we are tempted
to expect from him a cosmopolitan attitude on all questions affecting
individuals. He might well look at human rights from the point of view
of common humanity, differentiated solely by personal virtues and vices
and unaffected by the accident of freedom or servitude. But we do not
find him doing this. He might, and did, feel attracted by the lofty
nobility of the Stoic system; but he could not become a Stoic. No doubt
that system could be more or less adapted to the conditions of Roman
life: it was not necessary to make the Stoic principles ridiculous by
carrying[754] priggishness to the verge of caricature. But the notion
that no fundamental difference existed between races and classes, that
for instance the Wise Man, human nature’s masterpiece, might be found
among slaves, was more than Cicero or indeed any level-headed Roman
could digest. The imperial pride of a great people, conscious of present
predominance through past merit, could not sincerely accept such views.
To a Roman the corollary of accepting them would be the endeavour (more
or less successful) to act upon them. This he had no intention of doing,
and a mere theoretical assent[755] to them as philosophical speculations
was a detail of no serious importance. Taking this as a rough sketch of
the position occupied by Romans of social and political standing, we must
add to it something more to cover the case of Cicero. He was a ‘new man.’
He was not a great soldier. He was not a revolutionary demagogue. He was
ambitious. In order to rise and take his place among the Roman nobles he
had to fall in with the sentiments prevailing among them: the newly-risen
man could not afford to leave the smallest doubt as to his devotion to
the privileges of his race and class. Thus, if there was a man in Rome
peculiarly tied to principles of human inequality, it was Cicero.

Therefore we need not be surprised to find that this quick-witted and
warm-hearted man looked upon those engaged in handwork with a genial
contempt[756] sometimes touched with pity. To him, as to the society in
which he moved, bodily labour seemed to deaden interest[757] in higher
things, in fact to produce a moral and mental degradation. In the case
of slaves, whose compulsory toil secured to their owners the wealth and
leisure needed (and by some employed) for politics or self-cultivation,
the sacrifice of one human being for the benefit of another was an
appliance of civilization accepted and approved from time immemorial.
But the position of the freeman working for wages, particularly of the
man who lived by letting out his bodily strength[758] to an employer
for money, was hardly less degrading in the eyes of Roman society, and
therefore in those of Cicero. We have no description of the Roman mob
by one of themselves. That the rough element[759] was considerable, and
ready to bear a hand in political disorder, is certain. But they were
what circumstances had made them, and it is probable that the riotous
party gangs of Cicero’s time were not usually recruited among the best
of the wage-earners. It is clear that many slaves took part in riots,
and no doubt a number of freedmen also. In many rural districts disputes
between neighbours easily developed into acts of force and the slaves of
rival claimants did battle for their several owners. Moreover, slaves
might belong, not to an individual, but to a company[760] exploiting some
state concession of mineral or other rights. In such cases ‘regrettable
incidents’ were always possible. And the wild herdsmen (_pastores_)
roaming armed in the lonely hill-country were a ready-made soldiery ever
inclined to brigandage or servile rebellions, a notorious danger. It was
an age of violence in city and country. Rich politicians at last took to
keeping private bands[761] of swordsmen (_gladiatores_). And it is to be
borne in mind that, while a citizen might be unwilling to risk the life
of a costly[762] slave, his own property, a slave would feel no economic
restraint to deter him from killing his master’s citizen enemy.

The employment of slaves in the affrays that took place in country
districts over questions of disputed right is fully illustrated in the
speeches[763] delivered in cases of private law. The fact was openly
recognized in the legal remedies provided, for instance in the various
_interdicta_ framed to facilitate the trial and settlement of disputes
as to _possessio_. The forms contemplated the probability of slaves
being engaged in assailing or defending possession on behalf of their
masters, and the wording even varied according as the force in question
had been used by men armed or unarmed. Counsel of course made much or
little of the happenings in each case according to the interest of their
clients. But that bloodshed occurred at times in these fights is certain.
And there was no regular police force to keep order in remote corners
of the land. When slaves were once armed and set to fight, they would
soon get out of hand, and a slaveowner might easily lose valuable men.
Nay more, an epidemic of local brigandage might result, particularly in
a time of civil war and general unrest, and none could tell where the
mischief would end. We can only form some slight notion of the effect of
such conditions as these on the prospects of peaceful agriculture. The
speech _pro Quinctio_ belongs to 81 BC, the _pro Tullio_ to 71, the _pro
Caecina_ to 69. When we reflect that the slave rising under Spartacus
lasted from 73 to 71, and swept over a large part of Italy, we may fairly
conclude that this period was a bad one for farming.

The most striking picture of the violence sometimes used in the disputes
of rustic life meets us in the mutilated speech _pro Tullio_, of which
enough remains to make clear all that concerns us. First, the form of
action employed in the case was one of recent[764] origin, devised
to check the outrages committed by bands of armed slaves, which had
increased since the disturbances of the first civil war. The need for
such a legal remedy must have been peculiarly obvious at the time of the
trial, for the rising of Spartacus had only just been suppressed. Cicero
refers to the notorious scandal of murders committed by these armed
bands, a danger to individuals and even to the state, that had led to the
creation of the new form of action at law. In stating the facts of the
case, of course from his client’s point of view, he gives us details[765]
which, true or not, were at least such as would not seem incredible to a
Roman court. Tullius owned an estate in southern Italy. That his title
to it was good is taken for granted. But in it was reckoned a certain
parcel of land which had been in undisputed possession of his father.
This strip, which was so situated as to form a convenient adjunct to a
neighbouring estate, was the cause of trouble. The neighbouring estate
had been bought by two partners, who had paid a fancy price for it.
The bargain was a bad one, for the land proved to be derelict and the
farmsteads all burnt down. One of the partners induced the other to buy
him out. In stating the area of the property he included the border strip
of land claimed by Tullius as his own. In the process of settlement of
boundaries for the transfer to the new sole owner he would have included
the disputed ground, but Tullius instructed[766] his attorney and his
steward to prevent this: they evidently did so, and thus the ownership
of the border strip was left to be determined by process of law. The
sequel was characteristic of the times. The thwarted claimant armed a
band of slaves and took possession[767] of the land by force, killing the
slaves who were in occupation on behalf of Tullius, and committing other
murders and acts of brigandage by the way. We need not follow the case
into the law-court. What concerns us is the evidence of unfortunate land
speculation, of land-grabbing, of boundary-disputes, and of the prompt
use of violence to supersede or hamper the legal determination of rights.
The colouring and exaggeration of counsel is to be allowed for; but we
can hardly reject the main outlines of the picture of armed slave-bands
and bloodshed as a rural phenomenon of the sorely tried South of Italy.

The speech _pro Caecina_ shews us the same state of things existing in
Etruria. The armed violence alleged in this case is milder in form: at
least the one party fled, and nobody was killed. Proceedings were taken
under a possessory interdict issued by a praetor, and Cicero’s artful
pleading is largely occupied with discussion of the bearing and effect of
the particular formula employed. Several interesting transactions[768]
are referred to. A man invests his wife’s dowry in a farm, land being
cheap, owing to bad times, probably the result of the Sullan civil war.
Some time after, he bought some adjoining land for himself. After his
death and that of his direct heir, the estate had to be liquidated for
purpose of division among legatees. His widow, advised to buy in the
parcel of land adjoining her own farm, employed as agent a man who had
ingratiated himself with her. Under this commission the land was bought.
Cicero declares that it was bought for the widow, who paid the price,
took possession, let it to a tenant, and held it till her death. She
left her second husband Caecina heir to nearly all her property, and
it was between him and the agent Aebutius that troubles now arose. For
Aebutius declared that the land had been bought by him for himself, and
that the lady had only enjoyed the profits of it for life in usufruct
under her first husband’s will. This was legally quite possible. At the
same time he suggested that Caecina had lost the legal capacity of taking
the succession at all. For Sulla had degraded the citizens belonging
to Volaterrae, of whom Caecina was one. Cicero is more successful in
dealing with this side-issue than in establishing his client’s claim
to the land. The dispute arising out of that claim, the armed violence
used by Aebutius to defeat Caecina’s attempt to assert possession, and
the interdict granted to Caecina, were the stages by which the case came
into court. Its merits are not certain. But the greedy characters on both
sides, the trickery employed by one side or other (perhaps both), and the
artful handling of the depositions of witnesses, may incline the reader
to believe that the great orator had but a poor case. At all events
farming in Etruria appears as bound up with slave labour and as liable to
be disturbed by the violence of slaves in arms.

In the above cases it suited Cicero’s purpose to lay stress on the
perils that beset defenceless persons who were interested in farms in
out-of-the-way[769] places. Yet the use of armed force was probably
most habitual on the waste uplands, and his references to the lawless
doings of the brigand slave-bands fully confirm the warnings of Varro.
His tone varies according to the requirements of his client’s case, but
he has to admit[770] that wayfarers were murdered and bloody affrays
between rival bands ever liable to occur. He can on occasion[771] boldly
charge a political opponent with deliberate reliance on such forces
for revolutionary ends. Thus of C Antonius he asserts ‘he has sold all
his live stock and as good as parted with his open pastures, but he is
keeping his herdsmen; and he boasts that he can mobilize these and start
a slave-rebellion whenever he chooses.’ There was no point in saying
this if it had been absurdly incredible. Another glimpse of the utter
lawlessness prevalent in the wilds appears in the story[772] of murders
committed in Bruttium. Suspicion rested on the slaves employed by the
company who were exploiting the pitch-works in the great forest of Sila
under lease from the state. Even some of the free agents of the company
were suspected. The case, which was dealt with by a special criminal
tribunal, belongs to the year 138 BC, and attests the long standing of
such disorders. And it is suggestive of guilty complicity on the part of
the lessees that, though they eventually secured an acquittal, it was
only after extraordinary exertions on the part of their counsel.

Indeed these great gangs of slaves in the service of _publicani_ were
in many parts of Italy and the Provinces a serious nuisance. Wherever
the exploitation of state properties or the collection of dues was
farmed out to contractors, a number of underlings would be needed. The
lower grades were slaves: a few rose to higher posts as freedmen of the
various companies. Now some of the enterprises, such as mines quarries
woodlands and the collection of grazing dues on the public pastures,
were generally in direct contact with rural life, and employed large
staffs of slaves. The managers of a company were concerned to produce a
high dividend for their shareholders: so long as this resulted from the
labours of their men, it was a matter of indifference to them whether
neighbouring farmers were robbed or otherwise annoyed. That we hear
little or nothing of such annoyances is probably owing to the practice
of locking up slave-labourers at night in an _ergastulum_, for fear of
their running away, not to keep them from doing damage. Runaways do not
appear singly as a rustic pest. But in bands there was no limit to the
harm that _fugitivi_ might do; witness the horrors of the slave-wars. In
short, wherever slaves were employed in large numbers, the possibility
of violence was never remote. Their masters had always at hand a force
of men, selected for bodily strength and hardened by labour, men with
nothing but hopeless lives to lose, and nothing loth to exchange dreary
toil for the dangers of a fight in which something to their advantage
might turn up. No doubt the instances of slaves called to arms in rustic
disputes were far more numerous than those referred to by Cicero: he only
speaks of those with which he was at the moment concerned.

Is it then true that in the revolutionary period farming depended on
slave-labour while its security was ever menaced by dangers that arose
directly out of the slave-system? I fear it is true, absurd though the
situation may seem to us. Between the great crises of disturbance were
spells of comparative quiet, in which men could and did farm profitably
in the chief agricultural districts of Italy. But it must be remembered
that many an estate changed hands in consequence of civil war, and that
many new landlords profited economically by appropriating the capital
sunk in farms by their predecessors. The case of Sextus Roscius of Ameria
gives us some light on this point. The picture drawn[773] by Cicero of
the large landed estate of the elder Roscius, of his wealth and interest
in agriculture, of his jealous and malignant relatives, of the reasons
why he kept his son Sextus tied to a rustic life, is undoubtedly full
of colouring and subtle perversions of fact. Let it go for what it may
be worth. The accused was acquitted of the crime laid to his charge
(parricide), but there is no sign that he was ever able to recover the
estate and the home from which his persecutors had driven him. They had
shared the plunder with Chrysogonus the favoured freedman of Sulla, who
himself bought the bulk of the property at a mere fraction of its market
value, and it is practically certain that the rogues kept what they got.
It was easy to make agriculture pay on such terms. But what of the former
owners of such properties, on whose ruin the new men’s prosperity was
built? Can we believe that genuine agricultural enterprise was encouraged
by a state of things in which the fruits of long patience and skill were
liable to sudden confiscation?

In Cicero, as in other writers, we find evidence of a wage-earning
class living by bodily labour alongside of the slave-population. But in
passages where he speaks[774] of _mercennarii_ it is often uncertain
whether freemen serving for hire, or slaves hired from another owner,
are meant. In his language the associations[775] of the word are mean.
It is true that you may buy for money not only the day’s-work (_operae_)
of unskilled labourers but the skill (_artes_) of craftsmen. In the
latter case even Roman self-complacency will admit a certain dignity;
for men of a certain social status[776] such professions are all very
well. But the mere ‘hand’ is the normal instance; and for the time of his
employment he is not easily distinguished from a slave. Therefore Cicero
approves[777] a Stoic precept, that justice bids you to treat slaves as
you would hirelings—don’t stint their allowances (food etc), but get your
day’s-work out of them. In passages[778] where the word _mercennarius_ is
not used, but implied, there is the same tone of contempt, and it is not
always clear whether the workers are free or slaves. In short the word is
not as neutral as _operarius_, which connotes mere manual labour, whether
the labourer be free or not, and is figuratively used[779] to connote a
merely mechanical proficiency in any art. Our ‘journeyman’ is sometimes
similarly used.

There are other terms in connexion with land-management the use of
which by Cicero is worth noting. Thus a landlord may have some order to
give in reference to the cultivation of a farm. If he gives it to his
_procurator_[780], it is as an instruction, a commission authorizing him
to act; if to his _vilicus_, it is simply a command. For the former is a
free attorney, able at need to represent his principal even in a court
of law: the latter is a slave steward, the property of his master. The
_procurator_ is hardly a ‘manager’: he seldom occurs in connexion with
agriculture, and seems then to be only required when the principal is a
very ‘big man,’ owning land on a large scale, and probably in scattered
blocks. In such cases it would be convenient for (say) a senator to
give a sort of ‘power of attorney’ to an agent and let him supervise
the direction of a number of farms, each managed by a steward. I take
this policy to be just that against which the writers on agriculture
warn their readers. It sins against the golden rule, that nothing is a
substitute for the Master’s eye. Whether the agent referred to in the
speech _pro Tullio_, who as well as the steward received[781] written
instructions from Tullius, was guilty of any neglect or blunder, we
cannot tell. That any act done to a _procurator_ or by him was legally
equivalent to the same done to or by his principal, is a point pressed in
the _pro Caecina_, no doubt because it was safe ground and an excuse for
not dwelling on weak points in a doubtful case.

The _colonus_ as a tenant[782] farmer, whom we find mentioned in Varro
but not in Cato, appears in Cicero. In the _pro Caecina_ we read[783]
that the widow lady took possession of the farm and let it (_locavit_);
also that the tenant was after her death still occupying the farm, and
that a visit of Caecina, in which he audited the accounts of the tenant,
is a proof that Caecina himself was now in possession. That is, by
asserting control of the sitting tenant Caecina made the man his agent so
far as to retain possession through the presence of his representative.
If the facts were as Cicero states them, the contention would be legally
sound. For, as he points out in another passage, any representative[784]
will serve for these purposes of keeping or losing possession. If the
interdict-formula only says ‘attorney’ (_procurator_), this does not
mean that only an attorney in the technical sense, a plenipotentiary
agent appointed by an absentee principal with full legal formalities, is
contemplated. No, the brief formula covers agency of any kind: it will
apply to your tenant your neighbour your client or your freedman, in
short to any person acting on your behalf. In the great indictment of
Verres[785] we find a good instance of tenancy in Sicily, where it seems
to have been customary for large blocks of land to be held on lease from
the state by tenants-in-chief (_aratores_) who sometimes sublet parcels
to _coloni_. In this case the trouble arose out of the tithe to which the
land was liable. Verres, in order to squeeze an iniquitous amount out
of a certain farm, appointed a corrupt court charged to inquire whether
the (arable) acreage had been correctly returned by the _colonus_. Of
course they were instructed to find that the area had been fraudulently
understated. But the person against whom judgment was to be given was not
the _colonus_, but Xeno, who was not the owner of the farm. He pleaded
that it belonged to his wife, who managed her own affairs; also that he
had not been responsible for the cultivation (_non arasse_). Nevertheless
he was not only compelled to pay a large sum of money to meet the
unfair damages exacted, but subjected to further extortion under threat
of corporal punishment. The returns on which the tithes were assessed
would seem to have been required from the actual cultivators, and the
lessees of the year’s tithe to have had a right of action against the
owners or chief-tenants of the land, if the tenant farmer defaulted in
any particular. So far we are able to gather that tenant farmers were
no exception at this time, though perhaps not a numerous class; and
that they were not persons of much social importance. That they were to
a considerable extent dependent on their landlords is probable, though
not actually attested by Cicero, for we have seen evidence of it in a
passage of Caesar. Cicero’s reference[786] to the case of a lady who
committed adultery with a _colonus_ is couched in such terms as to imply
the man’s social inferiority. In another passage[787] we hear of a man in
the Order of _equites equo publico_ being disgraced by a censor taking
away his state-horse, and of his friends crying out in protest that he
was _optimus colonus_, thrifty and unassuming. Here we have a person of
higher social quality, no doubt: but I conceive _colonus_ to be used in
the original sense of ‘cultivator.’ To say ‘he is a good farmer’ does
not imply that he is a mere tenant, any more than it does in the notable
passage of Cato.

The _vilicus_ generally appears in Cicero as the slave steward familiar
to us from other writers. In one place[788] he is contrasted with
the _dispensator_, who seems to be a sort of slave clerk charged
with registering stores and serving out rations clothing etc. As this
functionary seldom meets us in the rustic system of the period, we may
perhaps infer that only large estates, where the _vilicus_ had no time
to spare from purely agricultural duties, required such extra service.
In saying that he can read and write (_litteras scit_) Cicero may seem
to imply that this is not to be expected from the _vilicus_: but the
inference is not certain, for the agricultural writers require stewards
to read at least. In another passage[789] we read that in choosing a
slave for the post of steward the one thing to be kept in view is not
technical skill but the moral qualities, honesty industry alertness.
Here it is plain that the orator is warping the truth in order to suit
his argument: Varro would never have disregarded technical skill. For
Cicero’s point is that what the state needs most in its ‘stewards’ (that
is, magistrates) is good moral qualities. On the same lines he had some
16 years before compared[790] Verres to a bad steward, who has ruined
his master’s farm by dishonest and wasteful management, and is in a fair
way to be severely punished for his offence. The tone of this passage is
exactly that of old Cato, put in the rhetorical manner of an advocate.

A few words must be said on the subject of manumission. In his defence
of Rabirius, accused of high treason, Cicero launches[791] out into a
burst of indignation at the attempted revival of an obsolete barbarous
procedure designed for his client’s destruction. The cruel method of
execution to which it points, long disused, is repugnant to Roman
sentiment, utterly inconsistent with the rights of free humanity. Such a
prospect[792] would be quite unendurable even to slaves, unless they had
before them the hope of freedom. For, as he adds below, when we manumit
a slave, he is at once freed thereby from fear of any such penalties as
these. Taken by itself, this passage is better evidence of the liability
of slaves to cruel punishment than of the frequent use of manumission.
But we know from Cicero’s letters and from other sources that freedmen
were numerous. And from a sentence[793] in one of the _Philippics_ we
may gather that it was not unusual for masters to grant freedom to
slaves after six years of honest and painstaking service. I suspect that
this utterance, in the context in which it occurs, should not be taken
too literally. That Romans of wealth and position liked to surround
themselves with retainers, humble and loyal, bound to their patron by
ties of gratitude and interest, is certain: and early manumissions were
naturally promoted by this motive. But the most pleasing instances
were of course those in which a community of pursuits developed a real
sympathy, even affection between owner and owned, as in the case of
Tiro, on whose manumission[794] Quintus Cicero wrote to congratulate his
brother. In all these passages, however, there is one thing to be noted.
They do not look to the conditions of rustic life; and, so far as the
evidence of Cicero goes, they do not shake my conviction that manumission
was a very rare event on country estates.

A topic of special interest is the evidence of the existence of farmers
who, whether employing slaves or not, worked on the land in person. What
does Cicero say as to αὐτουργία, in his time? It has been pointed out
above that, when it suits his present purpose, he not only enlarges on
the homely virtues of country folk but refers to the old Roman tradition
of farmer-citizens called from the plough to guide and save the state in
hours of danger. He made full use of this topic in his defence of Sextus
Roscius, and represented his client as a simple rustic, reeking of the
farmyard,—how far truly, is doubtful. But he does not go so far as to
depict him ploughing or digging or carting manure. It is reasonable to
suppose that the slaves to whom he refers[795] did the rough farm-work
under his orders. When he can make capital out of the wrongs of the
humble labouring farmer, the orator does not shrink from doing so. One
of the iniquities laid to the charge[796] of Verres is that he shifted
the burden of taking legal proceedings from the lessees of the Sicilian
tithes (_decumani_) to the tithe-liable lessees of the land (the
_aratores_). Instead of the tithe-farmer having to prove that his demand
was just, the land-farmer had to prove that it was unjust. Now this was
too much even for those farming on a large scale: it meant in practice
that they had to leave their farms and go off to make their appeals at
Syracuse. But the hardship was far greater in the case of small farmers
(probably sub-tenants), of whom he speaks thus: ‘And what of those whose
means of tillage[797] consist of one yoke of oxen, who labour on their
farms with their own hands—in the days before your governorship such
men were a very numerous class in Sicily—when they have satisfied the
demands of Apronius, what are they to do next? Are they to leave their
tillages, leave their house and home, and come to Syracuse, in the hope
of reasserting their rights at law against an Apronius[798] under the
impartial government of a Verres?’ No doubt the most is made of these
poor men and their wrongs. But we need not doubt that there were still
some small working farmers in Sicily. In the half-century or so before
the time of Verres we hear[799] of free Sicilians who were sorely
disturbed by the great servile rebellions and even driven to make common
cause with the insurgent slaves. Some such ‘small men’ were evidently
still to be found wedged in among the big plantations.

Another important passage occurs in the artful speech against the
agrarian bill of Rullus. It refers to the _ager Campanus_, on the value
of which as a public asset[800] Cicero insists. This exceptionally
fertile district was, and had long been, let by the state to cultivating
tenants, whose regularly-paid rents were one of the safest items in
the Roman budget. These farms were no _latifundia_, but apparently of
moderate size, such that thrifty farmers could make a good living in
this favoured land. With the various political[801] changes, carrying
with them disturbances of occupancy, caused by wars in the past, we
are not here concerned. Cicero declares that one aim of the bill was
the assignation of this district to new freeholders, which meant that
the state treasury would lose a sure source of revenue. This, in the
interest of the aristocratic party, he was opposing, and undoubtedly
misrepresented facts whenever it suited his purpose. In matters of this
kind, he says, the cry is often raised[802] that it is not right for
lands to lie depopulated with no freemen left to till them. This no doubt
refers to the Gracchan programme for revival of the peasant farmers.
Cicero declares that such a cry is irrelevant to the present issue,
for the effect of the bill will be to turn out the excellent sitting
tenants[803] only to make room for new men, the dependants and tools of a
political clique. The reason why, after the fall of Capua in the second
Punic war, that city was deprived of all corporate existence, and yet
the houses were left standing, was this: the menace of a disloyal Capua
had to be removed, but a town-centre of some sort could not be dispensed
with. For marketing, for storage[804] of produce, the farmers must have
some place of common resort: and when weary with working on their farms
they would find the town homesteads a welcome accommodation. Allowing for
rhetorical colouring in the interests of his case, perhaps we may take it
from Cicero that a fair number of practical working farmers were settled
on the Campanian plain. His prediction[805] that, if this district were
to be distributed in freehold allotments, it would presently pass into
the hands of a few wealthy proprietors (as the Sullan allotments had been
doing) suggests a certain degree of sincerity. But taken as a whole the
utterances of Cicero are too general, and too obviously meant to serve
a temporary purpose, to furnish trustworthy data for estimating the
numerical strength and importance of the working farmers in the Italy of
his day.


XXVII. SALLUST AND OTHERS.

In the writings of Cicero’s contemporaries other than Varro there is very
little to be found bearing upon rustic life and labour as it went on in
their time. Literature was occupied with other themes appropriate to the
political conflicts or social scandals or philosophic questionings that
chiefly interested various individuals and the circles in which they
moved. The origins of civilization formed a fascinating problem for some,
for instance the Epicurean =Lucretius=: but his theory of the development
of agriculture deals with matters outside of our subject. The one helpful
passage of =Caesar=[806] has been noticed already. So too has the
contemptuous reference[807] of =Sallust= to agriculture as slaves’ work.
This writer in a few places touches on points of interest. For instance,
in speaking[808] of the various classes of men who were ripe for
revolution, he says ‘moreover there were the able-bodied men who had been
used to earn a hard living as hired labourers on farms; the attraction of
private and public bounties had drawn them into Rome, where they found
idle leisure preferable to thankless toil.’ Such statements, unsupported
by statistics, must be received with caution, but this assertion is so
far backed up by what we learn from other sources, that we can accept it
as evidence. How many such rustic immigrants of this class there were
at any given moment, is what we want to know, and do not. Again, in a
passage[809] describing the popularity of Marius in 108 BC, he says ‘in
short, the commons were fired with such enthusiasm that the handworkers
and the rustics of all sorts, men whose means and credit consisted in
the labour of their hands, struck work and attended Marius in crowds,
putting his election before their own daily needs.’ In this there is
perhaps some exaggeration, but the picture is probably true in the main.
The _agrestes_ may include both small farmers and labourers. But they
can hardly have come from great distances, and so were probably not very
numerous. The description is as loose as passages of the kind were in
ancient writers, and are still. The references to rustic slave-gangs, and
Catiline’s refusal to arm them in support of his rising, have been cited
above.

We now pass into the period in which the last acts of the Roman
Republican drama were played and the great senatorial aristocrats, in
whose hands was a great share of the best lands in Italy, lost the
power to exploit the subject world. Not only by official extortion in
provincial governorships, but by money-lending at usurious interest[810]
to client princes or provincial cities, these greedy nobles amassed
great sums of money, some of which was employed in political corruption
to secure control of government at home. Civil wars and proscriptions
now thinned their ranks, and confiscations threw many estates into the
market. The fall of Antony in 31 BC left Octavian master of the whole
empire of Rome, an emperor ruling under republican disguises. Now it
was naturally and properly his aim to neutralize the effects of past
disorders and remove their causes. He looked back to the traditions of
Roman growth and glory, and hoped by using the lessons thus learnt to
revive Roman prosperity and find a sound basis for imperial strength.
He worked on many lines: that which concerns us here is his policy
towards rustic life and agriculture. As he persuaded and pressed the
rich to be less selfish[811] and more public-spirited, to spend less
on ostentation and the adornment of their mansions and parks, and to
contribute liberally to works of public magnificence or utility, a
duty now long neglected; even so he strove to rebuild Italian farming,
to make it what it had been of yore, the seed-bed of simple civic
and military virtues. But ancient civilization, in the course of its
development in the Roman empire, had now gone too far for any ruler,
however well-meaning and powerful, to turn the tide. Socially it was
too concentrated and urban, economically too individualistic and too
dependent on the manipulation of masses of capital. In many directions
the policy of the judicious emperor was marvellously successful: but he
did not succeed in reviving agriculture on the old traditional footing
as a nursery of peasant farmers. He sought to bring back a traditional
golden age, and court-poets were willing to assert[812] that the golden
age had indeed returned. This was not true. The ever-repeated praises
of country life are unreal. Even when sincere, they are the voice of
town-bred men, weary of the fuss and follies of urban life, to which
nevertheless they would presently come back refreshed but bored[813]
with their rural holiday. That the science and art of agriculture were
being improved, is true; hence the treatise of Varro, written in his old
age. But technical improvements could not set the small farmers as a
class on their legs again. The small man’s vantage lay (and still lies)
in minute care and labour freely bestowed, without stopping to inquire
whether the percentage of profit is or is not an adequate return for
his toil. Moreover, technical improvements often require the command of
considerable capital. The big man can sink capital and await a return on
the investment: but this return must be at a minimum rate or he will feel
that it does not ‘pay.’ For in his calculations he cannot help comparing
the returns[814] on different kinds of investments.

Under such conditions it is no wonder that we find _latifundia_ still
existing under the early Empire in districts suited for the plantation
system. No doubt much of the large landholding was the outcome of social
ambitions. Men who had taken advantage of civil war and its sequels to
sink money in land took their profit either in a good percentage on
plantations, or in the enhanced importance gained by owning fine country
places, or in both ways. A new class was coming to the front under the
imperial régime and among them were wealthy freedmen. These had not yet
reached the predominant influence and colossal wealth that marked their
successors of the next generation. But they had begun to appear[815]
in the last age of the Republic, and were now a force by no means to
be ignored. Such landowners were not likely to favour the revival of
peasant farmers, unless the presence of the latter could be utilized
in the interest of the big estates. There were two ways in which this
result could be attained. A small freeholder might, from the small size
of his farm, have some spare time, and be willing to turn it to account
by working elsewhere for wages. Such a man would be a labourer of the
very best kind, but he could not be relied upon to be disengaged at a
particular moment; for, if not busy just then on his own farm, some other
employer might have secured his services. A small tenant farmer, to whom
part of a great estate was let, would be governed by any conditions
agreed upon between him and his landlord. That these conditions might
include a liability to a certain amount of actual service at certain
seasons on his landlord’s estate, is obvious. That the _coloni_ of later
times were normally in this position, is well known. That this system,
under which a tenant retaining personal freedom was practically (and at
length legally) bound to the soil, suddenly arose and became effective,
is most improbable. Whether we can detect any signs of its gradual
introduction will appear as our inquiry proceeds. We have already noted
the few references to tenant _coloni_ under the Republic. It is enough to
remark here that, whatever degree of improvement in agriculture may have
taken place owing to the reestablishment of peace and order, it could
hardly have been brought about without employing the best labour to be
had. If therefore we find reason to believe that the supply of skilled
free labour for special agricultural work was gradually found by giving
a new turn to the tenancy-system, we may hazard a guess that the first
tentative steps in this direction belong to the quiet developments of the
Augustan peace.




ROME—THE EMPIRE


XXVIII. AGRICULTURE AND AGRICULTURAL LABOUR UNDER THE ROMAN EMPIRE.
GENERAL INTRODUCTION.

That the position of the working farmer in the fourth and fifth centuries
AD was very different from what it had been in the early days of the
Roman Republic, is hardly open to question. That in the last two
centuries of the Republic his position had been gravely altered for the
worse in a large (and that in general the best) part of Italy, is not
less certain. This period, from 241 to 31 BC, had seen the subjection
to Rome of the Mediterranean countries, and the Italian peninsula was
an imperial land. It was inevitable that from a dominion so vast and
various there should be some sort of reaction on its mistress, and
reaction there had been, mostly for evil, on the victorious Roman state.
The political social and moral effects of this reaction do not concern
us here save only in so far as the economic situation was affected
thereby. For instance, the plunder of the Provinces by bad governors
and the extortions practised by subordinate officials, the greed of
financiers and their agents, were the chief sources of the immense sums
of money that poured into Italy. The corruption promoted by all this
ill-gotten wealth expressed itself in many forms; but in no way was it
more effective than in degradation of agriculture. It was not merely that
it forwarded the movement towards great aggregations of _latifundia_.
It supplied the means of controlling politics by bribery and violence
and rendering nugatory all endeavours to reform the land-system and
give legislative remedies a fair trial. The events of the revolutionary
period left nearly all the land of Italy in private ownership, most of
it in the hands of large owners. The Sullan and Triumviral confiscations
and assignations were social calamities and economic failures. Of their
paralysing effect on agriculture we can only form a general notion, but
it is clear that no revival of a free farming peasantry took place.

Changes there had been in agriculture, due to influences from abroad.
Farming on a large scale and organization of slave labour had given it
an industrial turn. The crude and brutal form in which this at first
appeared had probably been somewhat modified by experience. The great
plantations clumsily adapted from Punic models were not easily made to
pay. More variety in crops became the fashion, and the specializing
of labour more necessary. In this we may surely trace Greek and
Greco-oriental influences, and the advance in this respect is reflected
in the more scientific precepts of Varro as compared with those of Cato.
But, so long as the industrial aim, the raising of large crops for the
urban market, prevailed, this change could not tend to revive the farming
peasantry, whose aim was primarily an independent subsistence, and who
lacked the capital needed for agricultural enterprise on industrial
lines. Meanwhile there was the large-scale slavery system firmly
established, and nothing less than shrinkage of the supply of slaves was
likely to shake it.

But the course of Roman conquest and formation of Provinces had brought
Italy into contact with countries in which agriculture and its relation
to governments stood on a very different footing from that traditional
in Roman Italy. The independent peasant farmer living by his own labour
on his own land, a double character of citizen and soldier, untroubled
by official interference, was a type not present to the eyes of Romans
as they looked abroad. Tribal ownership, still common in the West, had
been outgrown in Italy. The Carthaginian system, from which much had
been learnt, was an exploitation-system, as industrial as a government
of merchant princes could make it. In Sicily it met a Hellenistic system
set up by the rulers of Syracuse, and the two seem to have blended or
at least to have had common characteristics. The normal feature was
the payment of a tithe of produce (δεκάτη) to the State. For the State
claimed the property of the land, and reserved to itself a regular 10%
in acknowledgement thereof. This royal title had passed to Rome, and
Rome accordingly levied her normal _decumae_, exemption from which was
a special favour granted to a few communities. Now the principle that
the ultimate ownership of land is vested in the King[816] was well known
in the East, and is to be traced in several of the monarchies founded
by the Successors of Alexander. In the Seleucid and Attalid kingdoms
there have been found indications of it, though the privileges of cities
and temples checked its general application. But in Egypt it existed in
full vigour, and had done so from time immemorial. It was in fact the
most essential expression of oriental ideas of sovranty. Combined with
it was the reservation of certain areas as peculiarly ‘royal lands’ the
cultivators of which were ‘royal farmers,’ βασιλικοὶ γεωργοί, standing
in a direct relation to the King and controlled by his administrative
officials. The interest of the sovran was to extract a regular revenue
from the crown-lands: hence it was the aim of government to secure the
residence of its farmers and the continuous cultivation of the soil. The
object was attained by minute regulations applied to a submissive people
of small needs.

It is evident that agriculture under conditions such as these was based
on ideas fundamentally different from those prevalent in Italy. There
private ownership was the rule, and by the end of the Republic it was so
more than ever. The _latifundia_ had grown by transfers of property[817]
in land, whether the holdings so absorbed were original small freeholds
or allotments of state land granted under agrarian laws. Present estates,
whether large or small, were normally held under a full proprietary
title; and the large ones at least were valued as an asset of social and
political importance rather than as a source of economic profit. The
owner could do what he would with his own, and in Italy[818] there was
no tax-burden on his land. We may ask how it came about that the Italian
and Provincial systems stood thus side by side, neither assimilating
the other. The answer is that the contrast suited the interests of the
moneyed classes who controlled the government of Rome. To exploit the
regal conditions taken over by the Republic abroad was for them a direct
road to riches, and the gratification of their ambitions was achieved
by the free employment of their riches at home. The common herd of poor
citizens, pauperized in Rome or scattered in country towns and hamlets,
had no effective means of influencing policy, even if they understood
what was going on and had (which they had not) an alternative policy of
their own. So the Empire took over from the Republic a system existing
for the benefit of hostile aristocrats and capitalists, with whom it was
not practicable to dispense and whom it was not easy to control.

We cannot suppose that the classes concerned with agriculture had any
suspicion how far-reaching were the changes destined to come about under
the new government. They could not look centuries ahead. For the present,
the ruler spared no pains to dissemble his autocratic power and pose as
a preserver and restorer of the Past. Caution and a judicious patronage
inspired literature to praise the government and to observe a discreet
silence on unwelcome topics. The attitude of Augustus towards agriculture
will be discussed below. Here it is only necessary to remark that the
first aim of his policy in this as in other departments was to set the
machine working with the least possible appearance of change. As the
republican magistracies were left standing, and gradually failed through
the incompetence of senatorial guidance, so no crude agrarian schemes
were allowed to upset existing conditions, and development was left to
follow the lines of changing economic and political needs. It is well to
take a few important matters and see very briefly how imperial policy set
going tendencies that were in course of time to affect profoundly the
position of agriculture.

In the first place it was clear that no stable reconstruction was
possible without a large and steady income. To this end a great reform of
the old methods of revenue-collection was necessary. The wasteful system
of tax-farmers practically unchecked in their exactions was exchanged for
collection by officials of the state or of municipalities. In the case of
land-revenue this change was especially momentous, for in no department
had the abuses and extortions of _publicani_ been more oppressive. And
it was in the Emperor’s Provinces that this reform was first achieved.
Agriculture was by far the most widespread occupation of the subject
peoples; and the true imperial interest was, not to squeeze the most
possible out of them at a given moment, but to promote their continuous
wellbeing as producers of a moderate but sure revenue. That this wise
policy was deliberately followed is indicated by the separate[819]
treatment of Egypt. Augustus did not present his new acquisition to
the Roman state. He stepped into the position of the late Ptolemies,
and was king there without the name. As he found the cash of Ptolemaic
treasure a means of paying off debts and avoiding initial bankruptcy,
so by keeping up the existing financial system he enjoyed year by year
a large income entirely at his own disposal, and avoided the risk of
disturbing institutions to which the native farmers had been used from
time immemorial. The possession of this vast private revenue undoubtedly
had much to do with the successful career of Augustus in establishing the
empire.

So long as the empire was secure from invasion, and the collection of
taxes on a fair and economical plan afforded sufficient and regular
returns, general prosperity prevailed over a larger area than ever
before. The boon of peace was to the subject peoples a compensation for
the loss of an independence the advantages of which were uncertain and in
most cases probably forgotten. If the benumbing of national feelings was
in itself not a good thing, the central government was able to pay its
way, and emperors could at need appear as a sort of benign providence,
by grants of money or temporary remissions of taxation in relief of
extraordinary calamities. And yet, as we can now see in retrospect, the
establishment of the new monarchy had set in motion tendencies that
were destined to upset the social and economic structure and eventually
to give it a more Oriental character. Italy long remained a favoured
metropolitan land. But the great landowning nobles no longer ruled it
and the Provinces also. No dissembling could conceal the truth that
their political importance was gone. It may be[820] that some of the
great landlords gave more attention to their estates as economic units.
It is much more certain that large-scale landholding abroad[821] was
more attractive than that in Italy. It was not a new thing, and under
the republican government great provincial Roman landlords had enjoyed
a sort of local autocratic position, assured by their influence in
Rome. But an emperor’s point of view was very different from that of
the old republican Senate. He could not allow the formation of local
principalities in the form of great estates under no effective control.
These landlords had been bitter opponents of Julius Caesar: Augustus
had been driven to make away with some of them: the uneasiness of his
successors at length found full vent in the action of Nero, who put to
death six great landlords in Africa, and confiscated their estates. Half
Africa, the Province specially affected, thus passed into the category of
Imperial Domains, under the control of a departmental bureau, and later
times added more and more to these _praedia Caesaris_ in many parts of
the empire.

The convenient simplicity of having great areas of productive land
administered by imperial agents more or less controlled by the officials
of a central department, into which the yearly dues were regularly paid,
cannot have escaped the notice of emperors. But the advantages of such a
system had been a part of their actual experience[822] from the first in
the case of Egypt. Egypt too was the special home of finance based on a
system of regulated agriculture and hereditary continuity of occupation.
In particular, the interest of the government in the maintenance and
extension of cultivation was expressed in minute rules for land-tenure
and dues payable, and the care taken to keep the class of ‘royal farmers’
in a prosperous condition. Thus there was recognized a sort of community
of interest between peasant and king. That middlemen should not oppress
the former or defraud the latter was a common concern of both. Now in
the Roman empire we note the growth of a system resembling this in its
chief features. We find the tillage of imperial domains[823] carried on
by small farmers holding parcels of land, generally as sub-tenants of
tenants-in-chief holding direct from the emperor. These small farmers
were evidently workers, whether they to some extent used slave-labour
or not. Imperial policy favoured these men as steady producers turning
the land to good account, and thus adding to the resources of the empire
without being (like great landlords) a possible source of danger. Hence
great care was taken to protect the _coloni Caesaris_ from oppression
by middlemen: and, so long as head-tenants and official agents did not
corruptly combine to wrong the farmers, the protection seems to have been
effective. Moreover, the advantage of retaining the same tenants on the
land whose conditions they understood by experience, and of inducing them
to reclaim and improve further portions of the waste, was kept clearly in
view. A policy of official encouragement in these directions was in full
swing in the second century AD and may perhaps have been initiated by
Vespasian.

It is not necessary to assume that these arrangements were directly
copied from Oriental, particularly Egyptian, conditions. The convenience
of permanent tenants and the ever-pressing need of food-supply are
enough to account for the general aim, and experience of the East would
naturally help to mature the policy. The establishment of the Empire
made it possible. But we must plainly note the significance of new ideas
in respect of residence and cultivation. In the Roman land-system of
Italy private ownership was the rule, and the general assumption that
the owner cultivated on his own account: stewards and slave-gangs were
common but not essential phenomena. It is true that the practice of
letting farms to cultivating tenants existed, and that in the first two
centuries of the Empire it was on the increase, probably promoted by
the comparative scarcity of slaves in times of peace. But tenancy was a
contract-relation, and the law, while protecting the tenant, gave to the
landlord ample means of enforcing regular and thorough cultivation. And
this automatically ensured the tenant’s residence in any conditions short
of final despair. We shall see that as agriculture declined in Italy it
became more and more difficult to find and keep satisfactory tenants: but
the tenant was in the last resort free to go, and the man who had to be
compelled to cultivate properly was just the man on whom the use of legal
remedies was least likely to produce the desired practical effect. Now
on the imperial domains abroad we find a growing tendency to insist on
residence, as a rule imposed from above. The emperor could not leave his
_coloni_ simply at the mercy of his head-tenants. He was very ready to
protect them, but to have them flitting at will was another matter. And
this tendency surely points to Egyptian analogies; naturally too, as the
Empire was becoming more definitely a Monarchy.

We shall also find reason to think that both in Italy and in the
Provinces there was a tendency to reduce farm-tenants to a considerable
degree of _de facto_ dependence by manipulation of economic relations.
A landlord could let a farm on terms apparently favourable but so
arranged that it was easy for the tenant to fall into arrears and
become his debtor. The exploitation of debtors’ necessities[824] was a
practice traditionally Roman from very early times. True, it was seldom
politic to sell up a defaulting tenant in the declining state of Italian
agriculture. But the gradual acceptance of a liability to small burdens
in lieu of cash payment might rob him of his effective independence
before he was well aware of the change in his position. On a great
provincial domain, the emperor being far away, a head-tenant could deal
with the sub-tenants on much the same lines. A trifling requirement,
just exceeding what was actually due, would be submitted to as not worth
the trouble and risk of setting the appeal-machinery in motion. Further
encroachments, infinitesimal but cumulative, might reduce the _colonus_
to a semi-servile condition: and, the poorer he became, the less his
prospect of protection from the emperor’s local agents, too often men
of itching palms. Still the _coloni_ were freemen, and we have evidence
that they sometimes appealed to their imperial lord, and with success.
It seems that in some respects _coloni Caesaris_ were at an advantage
as compared with _coloni_ of private landlords, at least in the means
of protection. Roman law was very chary of interference with matters of
private contract, and the principles guiding the courts were well known.
An astute landlord could see to it that his encroachments on a tenant’s
freedom did not entitle the man to a legal remedy. But the imperial
domains abroad were often, if not always, governed by administrative
procedure under the emperor’s own agents; and these gentry could quickly
be brought to order, and compelled to redress grievances, by a single
word from headquarters. That the word was forthcoming on occasion is
not wonderful. The policy of an emperor was to cherish and encourage
the patient farmers whose economic value was a sound imperial asset,
while the head-tenant was only a convenient middleman. But the private
landowner had no imperial interest to guide him, and looked only to his
own immediate profit.

In tracing the influences that changed the condition of the working
farmer we must not forget the establishment of a new military system.
The standing army created by Augustus was an absolute necessity for
imperial defence. At the same time it was a recognition of the fact
that the old system of temporary levies, long proved inadequate, must
henceforth be abandoned. Frontier armies could not be formed by simply
mobilizing free peasants for a campaign. The strength of the armies lay
in military skill, not in numbers. Long service and special training made
them uniformly professional, and provision was duly made for regular
conditions of retirement. The Italian peasant-farmers, much fewer than of
yore, and no longer all potential soldiers, were left to become simply
professional farmers. That agriculture nevertheless did not really
prosper was due to causes beyond their control; but that they, both
tenant _coloni_ and any remaining small owners, should tend to become a
purely peasant class was inevitable. Augustus may have wished to rebuild
Italian agriculture on a sound foundation of the peasant-elements,
but circumstances were too contrary for the successful prosecution of
any such design. Meanwhile the marked differentiation[825] of soldier
and farmer, and the settlement of veterans on allotments of land,
mainly in frontier Provinces, was proceeding. Analogies from the East,
particularly from Egypt, where such arrangements[826] were traditional,
can hardly have been ignored. In ancient Egypt the division of military
and farming classes had been so marked as to present the appearance of a
caste-system. But this was not peculiar to Egypt. It was in full vigour
in ancient India, where it impressed[827] Greek observers, to whom the
general absence of slaves, there as in Egypt, seemed one of its notable
phenomena.

I do not venture to suggest that Roman emperors set themselves
deliberately to substitute a fixed attachment of working farmers to
the soil for a failing system of rustic slave-labour. But it is not
likely that, as labour-problems from time to time arose, the well-known
Oriental solutions were without some influence on their policy. We
must not forget that Greek thinkers had long ago approved the plan of
strict differentiation of functions in ideal states, and that such
notions, popularized in Latin, were common property in educated circles.
Tradition[828] even pointed to the existence of some such differentiation
in primitive Rome. Therefore, when we find under the later Empire a
rigid system of castes and gilds, and the _coloni_ attached to the soil
with stern penalties to hinder movement, we must not view the situation
with modern eyes. The restraint, that to us seems a cruel numbing of
forces vital to human progress, would come as no great shock to the world
of the fourth century, long prepared for the step by experience not
encountered by theory. To us it is a painful revolution that, instead
of the land belonging to the cultivator, the cultivator had become an
appendage of the land. But it was the outcome of a long process: as for
progress in any good sense, it had ceased. Government had become a series
of vain expedients to arrest decay. And the rule of fixed _origo_, a
man’s officially fixed domicile, was nothing more than the doctrine of
the ἰδία long prevalent in the East.

The true significance of the change binding the tiller to the soil he
tilled is to be found in the fact that it was a desperate effort to
solve a labour-question. To secure a sufficient supply of food had
been a cause of anxiety to the imperial government from the first. The
encouragement of increased production had become an important part of
imperial policy in the second century. It looked to the small working
farmers as the chief producing agency, men who provided all or most
of the labour on their farms, and in at least some cases a certain
amount of task-work[829] on the larger farms of the head-tenants. But
in the wars and utter confusion of the third century the strain on the
system was too great. The peaceful and prosperous parts of the empire
suffered from increased demands on their resources to make good the
deficiencies of the Provinces troubled with invasions or rebellions.
And there can be no doubt that the working of governmental departments
was interrupted and impeded by the general disorder. In such times as
those of Gallienus and the so-called Thirty Tyrants the protection of
the small farmers by intervention of the central authority must have
been pitifully ineffective. Naturally enough, we do not get direct
record of this failure, but the change of conditions that followed on
the restoration of order by Diocletian shews what had been happening.
The increase of taxation, rendered necessary by the costly machinery
of the new government, led to increased pressure on the farmers, and
evasions had to be checked by increased restraints. In a few years the
facts were recognized and stereotyped by the law of Constantine, and
the _coloni_ were henceforth bound down to the soil by an act of state.
Another notable change[830] was introduced by requiring payment of dues
to be made in kind. The motive of this was to provide a certain means of
supporting the armies and the elaborate civil service; for the currency,
miserably debased in the course of the third century, was a quite
unsuitable medium for the purpose. That Diocletian, in these institutions
of a new model, was not consciously applying oriental usage to the empire
generally, is hardly credible. It only remained to reduce Italy to the
common level by subjecting Italian land to taxation. This he did, and the
new Oriental Monarchy was complete.

That a labour-question underlay the policy of attaching the _coloni_
to the land, is to be gathered from the following considerations. The
development of the plan of promoting small tenancies, particularly on
the imperial domains, was undoubtedly calculated to take the place of
large-scale cultivation by slave labour. It was a move in the direction
of more intensive tillage, and economically sound. So long as a firm hand
was kept on large head-tenants and imperial officials, the plan seems to
have been on the whole a success. But all depended on the protection of
the small working farmers, and of course on the moderation of government
demands. The disorders of the third century tended to paralyse the
protection while they increased demands. Therefore the head-tenants,
aided by the slackness or collusion of officials, gained a predominant
power, which imperial policy had been concerned to prevent. By the time
of Diocletian their position was far stronger than it had been under
Hadrian. To restore the former relations by governmental action would
be certainly difficult, perhaps impossible. As middlemen, through whose
agency the collection of dues in non-municipal areas could be effected,
they were useful. It was a saving of trouble to deal with a comparatively
small number of persons, and those men of substance. The remodelling
of the disordered Empire was no doubt a complicated and laborious
business, and anything that promised to save trouble would be welcomed.
So the government accepted[831] the changed position as accomplished
fact, and left the _coloni_, its former clients, to the mercies of the
men of capital. But the big men, controlling ever more lands, whether
as possessors or as imperial head-tenants or as ‘patrons’ of helpless
villagers, could not meet their obligations to the government without
having the disposal of a sufficient and regular supply of labour. And to
the authorities of the later Empire, deeply committed to a rigid system
of castes and gilds, no way of meeting the difficulty seemed open but
to extend the system of fixity to the class of toilers on the land. The
motive was a financial one, naturally. Non-industrial, and so unable to
pay for imports by export of its own manufactures, the civilization of
the empire was financially based upon agriculture. Looking back on the
past, we can see that the deadening of hope and enterprise in the farming
population was a ruinous thing. But the empire drifted into it as the
result of circumstances and influences long operative and eventually
irresistible. To displace the free peasant by the slave, then the slave
by the small tenant, only to end by converting the small tenant into a
serf, was a part of the Roman fate.




ROME—AUGUSTUS TO NERO


XXIX. HORACE AND VERGIL.

For literary evidence bearing on agriculture in the time of Augustus
we naturally look to Vergil and Horace. Now these two witnesses, taken
separately and construed literally, might convey very different, even
inconsistent, impressions of farm life and labour in the world around
them. And Vergil is the central figure of Roman literature, the poet who
absorbed the products of the past and dominated those of many generations
to come. His quality as a witness to the present is what concerns us
here. I have tried to discuss this problem thoroughly and fairly in a
special section. In order to do this, it has been necessary to deal _pari
passu_ with most of the evidence of Horace, the rest of which can be
treated first by itself.

=Horace=, the freedman’s son, himself an illustration of the way in which
the ranks of Roman citizenship were being recruited from foreign sources,
yields to none in his admiration of the rustic Romans of old[832] and the
manly virtues of the genuine stock. In the dialogue between himself and
his slave Davus the latter is made to twit him with his praises of the
simple life and manners of the commons of yore, though he would never be
content to live as they did. A palpable hit, as Horace knew: but he did
not change his tone. With due respect he speaks of the farmers of olden
time, men of sturdy mould and few wants. It was as poor men on small
hereditary farms[833] that M’ Curius and Camillus grew to be champions
of Rome. In those far-off days the citizen might have little of his
own, but the public treasury[834] was full; a sharp contrast to present
selfishness and greedy land-grabbing. Those old farmer folk put their own
hand to the work. Their sons were brought up to a daily round of heavy
tasks, and the mother of such families[835] was a strict ruler and an
active housewife. For the scale of all their operations was small, and
personal labour their chief means of attaining limited ends. They are not
represented as using slave labour, nor is the omission strange. For the
military needs of the great world-empire were never far from the minds of
the Augustan writers, conscious as they were of their master’s anxieties
on this score. Now the typical peasant of old time was farmer and soldier
too, and it is of the _rusticorum mascula militum proles_ that Horace is
thinking. There was no need to refer to farm-slaves even in the case of
Regulus[836], whom tradition evidently assumed to have been a slaveowner.
But, when he refers to circumstances of his own day, the slave meets us
everywhere; not only in urban life and the domestic circle, but on the
farm and in the contractor’s[837] labour-gang. We then hear of great
estates, of great blocks of land mostly forest (_saltus_)[838] bought up
by the rich, of the sumptuous _villae_ of the new style, all implying
masses of slave labour: also of the great estates outside[839] Italy,
from which speculators were already drawing incomes.

Side by side with these scenes of aggressive opulence, we find occasional
mention of a poorer class, farming small holdings, who are sometimes
represented[840] as cultivators of land inherited from their forefathers.
How far we are to take these references literally, that is as evidence
that such persons were ordinary figures in the rustic life of Italy,
may be doubted. The poet in need of material for contrasts, which are
inevitably part of his stock-in-trade, has little in common with the
statistician or even the stolid reporter. Nor can we be sure that the man
who ‘works his paternal farm with oxen of his own’ or ‘delights to cleave
his ancestral fields with the mattock,’ are workers doing the bodily
labour in person. Even Horace, inclined though he is to realism, cannot
be trusted so far: such words[841] as _arat_ and _aedificat_ for instance
do not necessarily mean that the man guides the plough or is his own
mason or carpenter. When he speaks of ‘all that the tireless Apulian[842]
ploughs’—that is, the harvests he raises by ploughing—he does not seem
to have in mind the small farmer. For the context clearly suggests corn
raised on a large scale. And yet elsewhere[843] he gives us a picture of
an Apulian peasant whose hard toil is cheered and eased by the work and
attentions of his sunburnt wife, a little ideal scene of rural bliss.
Apulia is a large district, and not uniform[844] in character, so we need
not assume that either of these passages misrepresents fact. And there
is a noticeable difference between the style of the Satires and Epistles
on the one hand and that of the Odes on the other. In vocabulary, as
in metre and rhythm, the former enjoy an easy license denied to the
severer lyric poems on which he stakes his strictly poetic reputation.
In the Odes[845] for instance _colonus_ bears the old general sense
‘tiller of the soil’: in the Satires we find it in the legal sense of
‘tenant-farmer’ as opposed to ‘owner,’ _dominus_. He refers in both
groups of poems to the military colonists[846] pensioned by Augustus
with grants of land. In neither place is the word _coloni_ used; this
is natural enough. We need only note the care with which the court-poet
refers to the matter. His master doubtless had many an anxious hour over
that settlement: the poet refers to the granting of lands, and does
not touch on the disturbance caused thereby. Nor is Horace peculiar in
this respect. The caution that marks the utterances of all the Augustan
writers is very apt to mislead us when we try to form a notion of the
actual situation. The general truth seems to be that the beginning of
the Empire was a time of unrest tempered by exhaustion, and that things
only calmed down gradually as the sufferers of the elder generation died
out. Wealth was now the one aim of most ambitions, and the race to escape
poverty was extreme. The merchant[847] in Horace is a typical figure. For
a while he may have had enough of seafaring perils and turn with joy to
the rural quiet of his country town: but to vegetate on narrow means is
more than he can stand, and he is off to the seas again. He is contrasted
with the farmer content to till his ancestral fields, whom no prospect of
gain would tempt to face the dangers of the deep: and he is I believe a
much more average representative of the age than the acquiescent farmer.

One passage in the works of Horace calls for special discussion by
itself, for the value of its evidence depends on the interpretation
accepted, and opinions have differed. In the fourteenth epistle of the
first book the poet expresses his preference for country life in the form
of an address to the steward of his Sabine estate, beginning with these
lines

    _Vilice silvarum et mihi me reddentis agelli,_
    _quem tu fastidis habitatum quinque focis et_
    _quinque bonos solitum Variam dimittere patres,_

thus rendered by Howes

    Dear Bailiff of the woody wild domain
    Whose peace restores me to myself again,—
    (A sprightlier scene, it seems, thy taste requires,
    To Varia though it send five sturdy sires
    The lords of five good households)—

and the question at once arises, what sort of persons are meant by these
‘five good fathers.’ In agreement with the excellent note of Wilkins I
hold that they are free heads of households, and that they are persons
existing in the then present time, not imagined figures of a former
age. It seems also clear that they were living on the modest estate
(_agellus_) of Horace. If so, then they can hardly be other than tenants
of farms included therein. Therefore it has naturally been inferred that
the estate consisted of a _villa_ with a home-farm managed by a steward
controlling the staff of eight slaves of whom we hear elsewhere: and that
the outlying portions were let to free farmers[848] on terms of money
rent or shares of produce. Horace would thus be the landlord of five
_coloni_, and his relations with them would normally be kept up through
the agency of the resident slave-steward of the home-farm. All this
agrees perfectly with other evidence as to the customary arrangements
followed on rural estates; and I accept it as a valuable illustration
of a system not new but tending to become more and more prevalent as
time went on. But it is well to note that the case is one from a hill
district, and that we must not from it draw any inference as to how
things were moving on the great lowland estates, the chief latifundial
farm-areas of Italy.

The _patres_ referred to are virtually _patres familias_[849], free
responsible persons, probably Roman citizens, but tenants, not landowning
yeomen of the ancient type. Whether their visits to Varia (Vicovaro)
were to bear their part in the local affairs of their market-town, or
to buy and sell, or for both purposes, is not quite clear; nor does it
here concern us. But we should much like to know whether these five
farmers, or some of them, employed[850] any slaves. I do not see how this
curiosity is to be gratified. Perhaps we may argue that their assumed
liberty to come and go points to the employment of some labour other
than their own: but would this labour be slave or free? If we assume (as
I think we fairly may) that the labour needed would be mainly regular
routine-work and not occasional help, this points rather to slave-labour.
Nor is there any general reason for distrusting that conclusion; only it
would probably mean slave-labour on a small scale. There is moreover no
reason to think that free wage-labourers for regular routine work were
plentiful in the Sabine hills. And these small farmers were not likely to
be creditors, served by debtors (_obaerati_) working off arrears of debt,
a class of labour which according to Varro seems to have been no longer
available in Italy. There I must leave this question, for I can add no
more.

It remains to ask whether the identification of _patres_ with _patres
familias_ exhausts the full meaning of the word. In the _Aeneid_ (XII
520) a combatant slain is described as by craft a poor fisherman
of Lerna, no dependant of the wealthy, and then follow the words
_conductaque pater tellure serebat_. Now most commentators and
translators seem determined to find in this a reference to the man’s
father, which is surely flat and superfluous. The stress is not on
_pater_ but on _conducta_. Is not _pater_ an honourable quality-term,
referring to the man[851] himself? He would not be always fishing in the
lake. He had a dwelling of some sort, most probably a patch of land, to
grow his vegetables. The point is that even this was not his own, but
hired from some landowner. I would render ‘and the land where the honest
man used to grow a crop from seed was rented from another.’ That _pater_
(Aeneas etc) is often used as a complimentary prefix, is well known,
and I think it delicately expresses the poet’s kindly appreciation of
the poor but honest and independent rustic. In the passage of Horace I
am inclined to detect something of the same flavour. Some have supposed
that the five ‘fathers’ were decurions of the local township of Varia,
who went thither to meetings of the local senate. I shrink from reading
this into the words of Horace, all the more as Nissen[852] has shewn good
reason for doubting whether Varia was anything more than a subordinate
hamlet (_vicus_) of Tibur.

The general effect of the words, taken in context with the rest of
the epistle, is this: the _vilicus_, once a common slave-labourer
(_mediastinus_) in Rome, hankers after town life, finding his rustic
stewardship dull on a small estate such as that of Horace. To Horace
the place is a charming retreat from the follies and worries of Rome.
To him the estate with its quiet homestead and the five tenants of the
outlying farms is an ideal property: he wants[853] a retreat, not urban
excitements. To the steward it seems that there is ‘nothing doing,’ while
the grandeur of a great estate is lacking. So the master is contented,
while the slave is discontented, with this five-farm property looked at
from their different points of view.

But the most serious problem that meets us in endeavouring to appraise
the evidence of the Augustan literature is connected with the _Georgics_
of Vergil. Passages from Horace will be helpful in this inquiry, in the
course of which the remarkable difference between these two witnesses
will appear. The stray references in other writers of the period are
for the most part not worth citing. =Tibullus= speaks of the farmer[854]
who has had his fill of steady ploughing, but this is in an ideal
picture of the origins of agriculture. His rural scenes are not of much
significance. In one place, speaking of hope[855] that sustains a man
in uncertainties, for instance a farmer, he adds ‘Hope it is too that
comforts one bound with a strong chain: the iron clanks on his legs, yet
he sings as he works.’ A rustic slave, no doubt. But that his hope is
hope of manumission is by no means clear: it may be hope of escape, and
the words are indefinite, perhaps left so purposely. That =Ovid=[856]
refers to the farmer statesmen and heroes of yore, who put their hands
to the plough, is merely an illustration of the retrospective idealism
of the Augustan age. Like Livy and the rest, he was conscious of the
decay of Roman vitality, and amid the glories and dissipations of Rome
recognized the vigour and simplicity of good old times. For him, and
for =Manilius=, speculation[857] as to the origins of civilization,
imaginings of a primitive communism, had attraction, as it had for
Lucretius and Vergil. It was part of the common stock: and in connexion
with the development of building it forms a topic of some interest[858]
in the _architectura_ of =Vitruvius=.

=Vergil.= All readers of Vergil’s _Georgics_ are struck by the poet’s
persistent glorification of labour and his insistence on the necessity
and profit of personal action on the farmer’s part. Yet on one very
important point there is singular obscurity. Is slave-labour meant to be
a part of his _res rustica_, or not? When he bids the farmer do this or
that, is he bidding him to do it with his own hands, or merely to see to
the doing of it, or sometimes the one and sometimes the other? So far as
I know, no sufficient attention[859] has been given to the curious, and
surely deliberate, avoidance of direct reference to slavery in this poem.
To this subject I propose to return after considering the references
in his pastoral and epic poetry. For in the artificial world of piping
shepherds and in the surroundings of heroic legend the mention of slaves
and slavery is under no restraint. This I hope to make clear; and, in
relation to the contrast presented by the _Georgics_, to emphasize, if
not satisfactorily to explain, one of the subtle reticencies of Vergil.

The _Bucolics_ place us in an unreal atmosphere. The scenic setting is a
blend of Theocritean Sicily and the poet’s own lowlands of the Cisalpine.
The characters and status of the rustics are confused in a remarkable
degree. Thus in the first eclogue Tityrus appears as a slave who has
bought his freedom late in life (lines 27-9), having neglected to amass a
_peculium_ in earlier years (31-2). It was only by a visit to Rome, and
the favour of Octavian, that he gained relief. But this relief appears,
not as manumission, but as the restoration of a landowner dispossessed by
a military colonist. The inconsistency cannot be removed by treating the
first version as symbolic or allegorical. It is there, and the poet seems
to have felt no sufficient inducement to remove it. Corydon in the second
eclogue has a _dominus_, and is therefore _servus_ (2). Yet he boasts
of his large property in flocks, which are presumably his _peculium_
(19-22). His dwelling is a lowly cot in the rough grubby surroundings
of the countryside (28-9). He is _pastor_ (1), but there are evidently
_aratores_ on the estate (66). He is warned that, if it comes to buying
favours with gifts, he cannot compete with his master Iollas (57). Had he
not better do some basket-work and forget his passion (71-3)?

In the third eclogue the status of Damoetas is far from clear. He appears
as _alienus custos_ of a flock, the love-rival of the owner (_ipse_),
whom he is robbing, profiting by the latter’s preoccupation with his
amour (1-6). He is in short head-shepherd (101 _pecoris magistro_), and
Tityrus (96) seems to be his underling. Menalcas in staking the cups
explains that he dare not risk any of the flock under his charge, which
belongs to his father and is jealously counted (32-43). He is owner’s
son, with no opportunities of fraud; probably free, for we can hardly
assume that the flock is a slave’s _peculium_. But whether Damoetas is
(_a_) a free hireling or (_b_) a slave hired from another owner or (_c_)
a slave of the flock-owner, is not to be inferred with confidence from
so indistinct a picture. In the ninth eclogue we are again[860] brought
across the rude military colonist (4) of the first eclogue. Moeris, who
seems to be the steward of Menalcas, speaks of _nostri_ (_agelli_, 2)
and _nostra_ (_carmina_, 12). Menalcas is _ipse_ (16), and supposed to
represent Vergil. I incline to believe that Moeris is a slave _vilicus_,
but cannot feel sure. So also in the tenth, we hear of _opilio_ and
_subulci_ (19), of _custos gregis_ and _vinitor_ (36). These would in the
Italy of Vergil’s time be normally slaves. But it is not the question of
their status that is uppermost in the poet’s mind. They appear in the
picture merely as figures suggesting the rustic environment on which he
loves to dwell. As for the fourth eclogue, it is only necessary to remark
that, however interpreted, it points to the return (6) of a blissful age,
and accordingly assumes the former existence of good old times.

It has been justly noted that the merry singing and easy life of the
swains in the _Bucolics_ are incongruous with the notorious condition
of the rustic slaves of Italy. No doubt the contrast is painful. But we
must not presume to impute to the great and generous poet a light-headed
and callous indifference to the miseries daily inflicted by capitalist
exploiters of labour on their human chattels. We must not forget that in
hill districts, where large-scale farming did not pay, rural life was
still going on in old-fashioned grooves. Nor must we forget that in his
native Cisalpine slavery was probably of a mild character. Some hundred
years later we hear[861] that chained gangs of slave-labourers were not
employed there: and the great armies recruited there in Caesar’s time do
not suggest that the free population had dwindled there as in Etruria or
Lucania. The song-loving shepherds are an importation from the Sicily of
Theocritus, an extinct past, an artificial world kept alive in literature
by the genius of its singer. In the hands of his great imitator the
rustic figures become even more unreal. Hence the extreme difficulty of
extracting any sure evidence on the status of these characters, or signs
of the poet’s own sentiments, from the language of the _Bucolics_.

In the _Aeneid_ we have the legends of ancient Italy and the origin of
Rome subjected to epic treatment. The drift of the poem is conditioned
by modern influence, the desire of Augustus to gain support for the new
Empire by fostering every germ of a national sentiment. The tale of Troy
has to be exploited for the purpose, and with the tale of Troy comes
the necessity of reproducing so far as possible the atmosphere of the
‘heroic’ age. There is therefore hardly any reference to the matters
with which I am now concerned. When the poet speaks[862] of the peoples
of ancient Italy it is in terms of general praise. Their warlike vigour
and hardihood, the active life of hunters and farmers, can be admired
without informing the reader whether they employed slave-labour or not.
And in the rare references[863] to slavery in his own day Vergil has
in mind the relation of master and slave simply, without any regard to
agriculture. But in depicting the society of the ‘heroic’ times, in
which the adventures of Aeneas are laid, a substratum of slavery was
indispensable. It was therefore drawn from the Greek epic, where it lay
ready to hand. Yet the references to slaves are less numerous than we
might have expected. We find them employed in table-service (I 701-6),
or as personal attendants (II 580, 712, IV 391, V 263, IX 329, XI 34).
We hear of a woman skilled in handicrafts (V 284) given as a prize, and
Camilla is dedicated as a _famula_ of Diana (XI 558). These are not very
significant references. But that slavery is assumed as an important
element in the social scheme may be inferred from the references to
captives in war (II 786, III 323, IX 272-3). They are liable to be
offered up as _inferiae_ to the dead (XI 81-2), and the victor takes the
females as concubines at will (III 323-9, IX 546). A discarded concubine
is handed over to a slave-consort (III 329), and the infant children of a
_serva_ form part of a common unit with their dam (V 285).

Two passages are worth notice from an economic point of view. In VIII
408-12, in a simile, we have the picture of a poor hard-working housewife
who rises very early to set her _famulae_ to work on their allotted
tasks of wool, to ‘keep the little home together.’ One can hardly say
that no such scene was possible in real life under the conditions of
Vergil’s time, though we may fairly doubt the reality of a picture
in which grim poverty and the desire to bring up a family of young
children are combined with the ownership and employment of a staff of
domestic slaves. For we find the not owning a single slave[864] used as
the most characteristic sign of poverty. And I shrink from describing
the situation industrially as the sweating of slave-labour to maintain
respectability. I do not think any such notion was in the poet’s
mind. That the simile is suggested by Greek models is pointed out by
Conington, and to regard it as a borrowed ornament is probably the safest
conclusion in general. It is however to be noted that the _famulae_ are
not borrowed, but an addition of Vergil’s own. The other passage, XII
517-20, relates the death in battle of an Arcadian, who in his home was
a fisherman, of humble station. The last point is brought out in the
words[865] _conductaque pater tellure serebat_. This seems to mean that
he was a small tenant farmer, a _colonus_ of the non-owning class. Such
a man might or might not have a slave or two. But, even were there any
indication (which there is not) to favour either alternative, the man’s
home is in Arcadia, though the picture may be coloured by the poet’s
familiarity with Italian details. Take it all in all, we are perhaps
justified in saying that in the _Aeneid_ the realities of slavery and
of humble labour generally are very lightly touched. Is this wholly due
to the assumed proprieties of the heroic epic, dealing with characters
above the ordinary freeman in station or natural qualities? Or may we
surmise that to Vergil, with his intense human sympathies, the topic was
in itself also distasteful, only to be referred to when it was hardly
possible to avoid it?

If little, in fact almost nothing, can be gleaned bearing on the subject
of labour from the _Bucolics_ and _Aeneid_, we might hope to find plenty
of information in the didactic poem specially addressed to farmers. In
the opening of the _Georgics_ (I 41) Vergil plainly says that he feels
sorry for the rustic folk, who know not the path to success in their
vocation: he appeals to the gods interested in agriculture, and above
all to Augustus, to look kindly on his bold endeavour to set farmers
in the right way. When he comes to speak of the peace and plenty, the
security and joys, of country life, he grows enthusiastic (II 458-74).
But among the advantages he does not omit to reckon the freedom from the
extravagance and garish display of city life, the freedom to drowse under
trees, the enjoyment of rural sights and sounds, in short the freedom to
take your ease with no lack of elbow-room (_latis otia fundis_). This
hardly portrays the life of the working farmer, to whom throughout the
poem he is ever preaching the gospel of toil and watchfulness. True,
he adds ‘there you find forest-lands (_saltus_) with coverts for wild
beasts, and a population inured to toil and used to scanty diet,’ among
whom yet linger survivals of the piety and righteousness of old. It is
fair to ask, who are these and what place do they fill in the poet’s
picture? Surely they are not the men who have fled from the vain follies
of the city: for they are genuine rustics. Surely not gang-slaves,
driven out to labour in the fields and back again to be fed and locked
up, like oxen or asses. To the urban slave transference to such a life
was a dreaded punishment. Are they free small-scale farmers? No doubt
there were still many of that class remaining in the upland parts of
Italy. But were they men of leisure, able to take their ease at will
on broad estates? I cannot think of them in such a character, unless I
assume them to own farms of comfortable size (of course not _latifundia_)
and to employ some labour of slaves or hirelings. And there is nothing
in the context to justify such an assumption. Lastly, are they poor
peasants, holding small plots of land and eking out a meagre subsistence
by occasional wage-earning labour? Such persons seem to have existed, at
least in certain parts of the country: but we know that some at least of
this labour hired for the job was performed[866] by bands of non-resident
labourers roaming in search of such employment. No, peasants of the
‘crofter’ type do not fit in with this picture of a rural life passed in
plenty and peaceful ease. I am therefore driven to conclude that the poet
was merely idealizing country life in general terms without troubling
himself to exercise a rigid consistency in the combination of details.
He has had many followers among poets and painters, naturally: but the
claim of the _Georgics_ to rank as a didactic treatise is exceptionally
strong, owing to the citations of Columella and Pliny. If then the poem
seems in any respect to pass lightly over questions of importance in the
consideration of farming conditions, we are tempted rather to seek for a
motive than to impute neglect.

But before proceeding further it is well to inquire in what sense the
_Georgics_ can be called didactic. What is the essential teaching of
the poem, and to whom is that teaching addressed? In outward form it
professes to instruct the bewildered farmers, suffering at the time from
effects of the recent civil wars as well as from economic difficulties of
old standing; and to convey sound precepts for the conduct of agriculture
in its various branches. But there is little doubt that the precepts are
all or most of them taken directly from earlier[867] writers, Roman or
Greek; and we may reasonably suppose that most of them (and those the
most practical ones) were well known to the very classes most concerned
in their application. It is absurd to suppose that agricultural tradition
had utterly died out. The real difficulty was to put it in practice.
Now, what class of farmers were to be benefited by the new poem? Was the
peasant of the uplands, soaked in hereditary experience, to learn his
business over again with the help of the poet-laureate’s fascinating
verse? Surely he spoke a rustic[868] Latin, and sometimes hardly that.
Was it likely that he would gradually absorb the doctrines of the
Vergilian compendium, offered in the most refined language and metre of
literary Rome? It is surely inconceivable. Nor can we assume that any
remaining intensive farmers of the Campanian plain were in much need
of practical instruction: what was needed there was a respite from the
unsettling disturbances of the revolutionary period. To suggest that a
part of the poet’s design was to supply much-needed teaching to the new
_coloni_ from the disbanded armies, would be grotesque in any case, and
above all in that of Vergil. If we are to find a class of men to whom
the finished literary art of the _Georgics_ would appeal, and who might
profit by the doctrines so attractively conveyed, we must seek them in
social strata[869] possessed of education enough to appreciate the poem
and sympathize with its general tone. Now all or most of such persons
would be well-to-do people, owners of property, often of landed property:
people of more or less leisure: in short, the cultured class, whose
centre was Rome. These people would view with favour any proposal for the
benefit of Italian agriculture. Many landowners at the time had got large
estates cheaply in the time of troubles, and to them anything likely to
improve the value of their lands, and to draw a curtain of returning
prosperity over a questionable past, would doubtless be welcome. They
would applaud the subtle grace with which the poet glorified the duty
and profit of personal labour. But that they meant to work with their
own hands I cannot believe. In the true spirit of their age, they would
as a matter of course take the profit, and delegate the duty to others.

Two alternatives[870] presented themselves to a landowner. He might
let his estate whole or in parcels to a tenant or tenants. Or he might
work it for his own account, either under his own resident direction,
or through the agency of a steward. All the evidence bearing on the
revolutionary period tends to shew that the resident landlord of a
considerable estate, farming his own land, was a very rare type indeed.
It was found most convenient as a general rule to let an out-of-the-way
farm to a cultivating tenant at a money rent or on a sharing system. A
more accessible one was generally put under a steward and so kept in hand
by the owner. The dwelling-house was in such cases improved so as to be a
fit residence for the proprietor on his occasional visits. Growing luxury
often carried this change to an extreme, and made the _villa_ a ‘place
in the country,’ a scene of intermittent extravagance, not of steady
income-producing thrift. True, it seems that the crude and wasteful
system of the earlier _latifundia_ had been a good deal modified by the
end of the Republic. A wealthy man preferred to own several estates
of moderate size situated near main routes of traffic. But this plan
required more stewards. And the steward (_vilicus_), himself a slave,
was the head of a slave-staff proportioned to the size of the farm. Now
the public effectually reached by the _Georgics_ may be supposed to have
included the landowners of education and leisure, whether they let their
land to tenants or kept it in hand. I cannot believe that the _coloni_
farming hired land[871] came under the poet’s influence. In other
words, the _Georgics_, in so far as the poem made its way beyond purely
literary circles, appealed chiefly if not wholly to a class dependent on
slave-labour in every department of their lives.

Maecenas, to whom the poem is in form addressed, had put pressure on
Vergil to write it. At the back of Maecenas was the new Emperor, anxious
to enlist all the talents in the service of the new dispensation. The
revival of rural Italy was one of the praiseworthy projects of the
Emperor and his confidential minister. It was indeed on every ground
manifestly desirable. But was it possible now to turn Romans of property
into working farmers? Would the man-about-Rome leave urban pleasures
for the plough-tail? Not he! Nor are we to assume that Augustus was
fool enough to expect it. Then what about Maecenas? His enjoyment of
luxurious ease[872] was a byword: that he retained his native commonsense
under such conditions is one of his chief titles to fame. No one can have
expected him to wield the spade and mattock or spread manure. The poet
writing with such a man for patron and prompter was not likely to find
his precepts enjoining personal labour taken too seriously. His readers
were living in a social and moral atmosphere in which to do anything
involving labour meant ordering a slave to do it. That the Emperor wished
to see more people interested in the revival of Italian agriculture was
well understood. But this interest could be shown by investing capital in
Italian land; and this is what many undoubtedly did. Recent proscriptions
and confiscations had thrown numbers of estates on the market. It was
possible to get a good bargain and at the same time win the favour of
the new ruler by a well-timed proof of confidence in the stability of
the new government. Now it is to say the least remarkable that Dion
Cassius, doubtless following earlier authorities, puts into the mouth of
Maecenas some suggestions[873] on this very subject. After advising the
Emperor to raise a standing army by enlisting the able-bodied unemployed
men in Italy, and pointing out that with the security thus gained, and
the provision of a harmless career for the sturdy wastrels who were at
present a cause of disorders, agriculture and commerce would revive, he
proceeds as follows. For these measures money will be needed, as it would
under any government: therefore the necessity of some exactions must be
faced. ‘The very first thing[874] then for you to do is to have a sale of
the confiscated properties, of which there are many owing to the wars,
reserving only a few that are specially useful or indispensable for your
purposes: and then to employ all the money so raised by lending it out
at moderate interest. If you do this, the land will be under cultivation
(ἐνεργός), being placed in the hands of owners who themselves work
(δεσπόταις αὐτουργοῖς δοθεῖσα): they will become more prosperous, having
the disposal of capital: and the treasury will have a sufficient and
perpetual income.’ He then urges the necessity of preparing a complete
budget estimate of regular receipts from the above and other sources,
and of the prospective regular charges both military and civil, with
allowance for unforeseen contingencies. ‘And your next step should be to
provide for any deficit by imposing a tax on all properties whatsoever
that bring a profit (ἐπικαρπίαν τινὰ) to the owner, and by a system of
tributary dues in all our subject provinces.’

That this long oration attributed by Dion to Maecenas is in great part
made up from details of the policy actually followed by the Emperor,
is I believe generally admitted. But I am not aware that the universal
income-tax suggested was imposed. The policy of encouraging agriculture
certainly formed part of the imperial scheme, and the function of the
_Georgics_ was to bring the power of literature to bear in support of the
movement. The poet could hardly help referring in some way to the crying
need of a great agricultural revival. He did it with consummate skill. He
did not begin by enlarging on the calamities of the recent past, and then
proceed to offer his remedies. Such a method would at once have aroused
suspicion and ill-feeling. No, he waited till he was able to glide easily
into a noble passage in which he speaks of the civil wars as a sort of
doom sanctioned by the heavenly powers. No party could take offence at
this way of putting it. Then he cries aloud to the Roman gods, not to
prevent the man of the hour (_hunc iuvenem_) from coming to the relief
of a ruined generation. The needs of the moment are such that we cannot
do without him. The world is full of wickedness and wars: ‘the plough is
not respected as it should be; the tillers of the soil have been drafted
away, and the land is gone to weeds; the crooked sickles are being forged
into straight swords.’ The passage comes at the end of the first book,
following a series of precepts delivered coolly and calmly as though
in a social atmosphere of perfect peace. The tone in which the words
recall the reader to present realities, and subtly hint at the obvious
duty of supporting the one possible restorer of Roman greatness, is an
unsurpassed feat of literary art. It is followed up at the end of the
second book in another famous passage, in which he preaches with equal
delicacy the doctrine that agricultural revival is the one sure road not
only to personal happiness but to the true greatness of the Roman people.

That this revival was bound up with the return to a system of farming
on a smaller scale, implying more direct personal attention on the
landlord’s part, is obvious. But the poet goes further. His model farmer
is to be convinced of the necessity and benefit of personal labour, and
so to put his own hand to the plough. The glorification of unyielding
toil[875] as the true secret of success was (and is) a congenial topic to
preachers of the gospel of ‘back to the land.’ It may well be that the
thoughtful Vergil had misgivings as to the fruitfulness of his doctrine.
A cynical critic might hint that it was easy enough for one man to urge
others to work. But a man like Maecenas would smile at such remarks. To
set other people to do what he would never dream of doing himself was to
him the most natural thing in the world. So the pressure of the patron
on the poet continued, and the _Georgics_ were born.

Let me now turn to certain passages of the poem in which farm-labour
is directly referred to, and see how far the status of the labourers
can be judged from the expressions used and the context. And first of
_aratores_. In I 494 and II 513 the _agricola_ is a plowman; free,
for all that appears to the contrary. In II 207, where he appears as
clearing off wood[876] and ploughing up the land, the _arator_ is called
_iratus_: this can hardly apply to an indifferent slave. The _arator_
of I 261, represented as turning the leisure enforced by bad weather to
useful indoor work, odd jobs in iron and wood work etc, may be one of a
slave-staff whom his master will not have idle. Or he may be the farmer
himself. The scene implies the presence of a staff of some kind, driven
indoors by the rain. And that the poet is not thinking of a solitary
peasant is further indicated by mention of sheep-washing, certainly
not a ‘one-man-job,’ in line 272. Why Conington (after Heyne) takes
_agitator aselli_ in 273 to be ‘the peasant who happens to drive the ass
to market,’ and not an _asinarius_ doing his regular duty, I cannot say.
On III 402, a very similar passage, he takes the _pastor_ to be probably
the farm-slave, not the owner, adding ‘though it is not always easy to
see for what class of men Virgil is writing.’ A remark which shews that
my present inquiry is not uncalled for. To return, there is nothing to
shew whether the ass-driver is a freeman or a slave. Nor is the status
of _messores_[877] clear. In I 316-7 the farmer brings the mower on to
the yellow fields; that is, he orders his hands to put in the sickle.
What is their relation to him we do not hear. So too in II 410 _postremus
metito_ is a precept addressed to the farmer as farmer, not as potential
labourer. On the other hand the _messores_ in the second and third
eclogues seem to be slaves, for there is reference to _domini_ in both
poems.

The _fossor_ is in literature the personification of mere heavy manual
labour. In default of evidence to the contrary, we must suppose him to
be normally[878] a slave. Thus the _fossor_ of Horace _odes_ III 18 is
probably one of the _famuli operum soluti_ of the preceding ode. But the
brawny digger of _Georgics_ II 264, who aids nature’s work by stirring
and loosening the caked earth, is left on a neutral footing. Nothing is
said. The reader must judge whether this silence is the result of pure
inadvertency. That _pastores_ very often means slave-herdsmen, is well
known. But Vergil seems to attribute to them a more real and intelligent
interest in the welfare of their charge than it is reasonable to expect
from rustic slaves. The _pastores_ of IV 278, who gather the medicinal
herb used in the treatment of bees, may be slaves: if so, they are not
mere thoughtless animals. And the scene is in the Cisalpine, where
we have noted that slavery was probably of a mild type. In III 420
the _pastor_ is called upon to protect his beasts from snakes. But we
know[879] that it was a part of slave-herdsmen’s duty to fight beasts of
prey, and that they were commonly armed for that purpose. In III 455 we
find him shrinking from a little act of veterinary surgery, which the
context suggests he ought to perform. But we know that the _magister
pecoris_ on a farm was instructed[880] in simple veterinary practice, and
it is hardly likely that other slaves, specially put in charge of beasts,
had no instructions. The _pastores_ (if more than one, the chief,) appear
as _pecorum magistri_ (II 529, III 445, cf _Buc_ III 101), a regular name
for shepherds: they are not the same as the _magistri_ of III 549, who
are veterinary specialists disguised under mythical names. In II 529-31
we have a holiday scene, in which the farmer (_ipse_) treats the _pecoris
magistri_ to a match of wrestling and throwing the javelin. If slaves
are meant, then Vergil is surely carrying back rustic slavery to early
days as part and parcel of the ‘good old times’ to which he points in the
following lines _hanc olim veteres vitam coluere Sabini_ etc. The _ipse_
will then be a genial farmer of the old school, whose slaves are very
different from the degraded and sullen chattels of more recent years. But
in this as in other cases the poet gives us no clear sign.

A passage[881] in which the reticence of which I am speaking has a
peculiar effect occurs in the description of the grievous murrain that
visited northern Italy some time before. One of a pair of oxen falls dead
while drawing the plough. The _tristis arator_[882] unyokes the other,
sorrow-stricken at the death of its fellow; he leaves the plough where
it stopped, and goes his way. Then follows a piece of highly-wrought
pathos[883] describing the dejection and collapse of the surviving ox.
‘What now avail him his toil or his services, his past work in turning
up the heavy land with the ploughshare?’ And the hardness of the poor
beast’s lot is emphasized by the reflexion that disease in cattle is
not induced by gluttony and wine-bibbing, as it often is in the case of
mankind, nor by the worries (_cura_) that rob men of refreshing sleep.
This much-admired passage may remind us of the high value set upon the ox
in ancient Italy, traditionally amounting to a kind of sanctity; for it
is said[884] that to kill an ox was as great a crime as to kill a man.
We may wonder too what the luxurious but responsible Maecenas thought
of the lines contrasting the simple diet and untroubled life of the ox
with the excesses and anxieties of man. But, if civilization owed much
to the labours of the ox, and if gratitude was due to man’s patient
helper, what about the human slave? Is it not a remarkable thing that the
_Georgics_ contain not a word of appreciative reference to the myriads of
toiling bondsmen whose sweat and sufferings had been exploited by Roman
landlords for at least 150 years? Can this silence on the part of a poet
who credits an ox with human affection be regarded as a merely accidental
omission?

Of poets in general it may I think be truly said that the relation
between the singer and his vocabulary varies greatly in various cases.
Personal judgments are very fallible: but to me, the more I read Vergil,
the more I see in him an extreme case of the poet ever nervously on
his guard[885] against expressing or suggesting any meaning or shade
of meaning beyond that which at a given moment he wishes to convey.
This is no original discovery. But in reaching it independently I have
become further convinced that the limitations of his vocabulary are
evidence of nice and deliberate selection. The number of well-established
Latin words, adaptable to verse and to the expression of ideas certain
to occur, that are used by other poets of note but not by him, is
considerable. I have a long list: here I will mention only one, the
adjective _vagus_. The word may have carried to him associations below
the pure dignity of his finished style. Yet Horace used it freely in the
_Odes_, and Horace was surely no hasty hack careless of propriety, and
no mean judge of what was proper. Now, when I turn to the _Georgics_,
Vergil’s most finished work, I am struck by the absence of certain words
the presence of which would seem natural, or even to be expected, in any
work professedly treating of agriculture in Roman Italy. Thus _servus_
does not occur at all, _serva_ in the _Aeneid_ only, and _servitium_ in
the strict sense only _Buc_ I 40 and _Aen_ III 327. In _Georg_ III 167-8
_ubi libera colla servitio adsuerint_ he is speaking of the breaking-in
of young oxen[886] in figurative language. So too _dominus_ and _domina_
occur in the _Bucolics_ and _Aeneid_ but not in the _Georgics_. The case
of _opera_ and the plural _operae_ may seem to be on a somewhat different
footing in so far as the special sense of _opera_ = ‘the average day’s
work[887] of a labourer’ would perhaps have too technical and prosaic a
flavour. In the single instance (_Aen_ VII 331-2), where it occurs in the
familiar phrase _da operam_, it is coupled with _laborem_, which rather
suggests a certain timidity in the use of a colloquial expression. The
plural, frequent in the writers on agriculture, he does not use at all,
whether because he avoids the statistical estimates in which it most
naturally comes, or from sheer fastidiousness due to the disreputable
associations of _operae_ in political slang. Perhaps neither of these
reasons is quite enough to account for the absence of the word from the
_Georgics_. That _famulus_ and _famula_ occur in the _Aeneid_ only is
not surprising, for they represent the δμῶες and δμωαὶ of Greek heroic
poetry. But _famula_ appears in the _Moretum_, of which I will speak
below.

That Vergil is all the while pointing the way to a system of small farms
and working farmers, though some topics (for instance stock-keeping)
seem to touch on a larger scale of business, may be gathered from his
references to _coloni_. The word is in general used merely as the
substantive corresponding to _colere_, and its place is often taken by
_agricola_ (I 300, II 459) or _rusticus_ (II 406) or other substitutes.
In II 433 _homines_ means much the same as the _agrestis_ of I 41, only
that the former need stimulus and the latter guidance. The typical
picture of the _colonus_ comes in I 291-302, where the small farmer
and his industrious wife are seen taking some relaxation in the winter
season, but never idle. It is surely a somewhat idealized picture. The
parallel in Horace (_epode_ II) is more matter-of-fact, and clearly
includes slaves, an element ignored by Vergil. The _colonus_ is not
a mere tenant farmer, but a yeoman tilling his own land, like the
_veteres coloni_ of the ninth eclogue, a freeman, and we may add liable
to military service, like those in I 507 whose conscription left the
farms derelict. A curious and evidently exceptional case is that of
the _Corycius senex_ (IV 125-46), said to be one of Pompey’s pirate
colonists. The man is a squatter on a patch of unoccupied land, which he
has cultivated as a garden, raising by unwearied industry quite wonderful
crops of vegetables fruit and flowers, and remarkably successful[888] as
a bee-keeper. Perhaps this transplanted Oriental had no slave, at least
when he started gardening. But I note that his croft was more than a
_iugerum_ (_pauca relicti iugera ruris_) at the time when Vergil saw it,
and I imagine the process of reclaiming the waste to have been gradual.
When this small holding was complete and in full bearing, would the work
of one elderly man suffice to carry it on? I wonder. But we get no hint
of a slave or a hireling, or even of a wife. All I can venture to say
is that this story is meant to be significant of the moral and material
wellbeing of the small cultivator. It is curious that just above (118,
cf 147-8) the poet is at pains to excuse his omission to discuss in
detail the proper management of _horti_, on the pretext of want of space.
For he was no mean antiquary, and Pliny tells[889] us that in the Twelve
Tables _hortus_ was used of what was afterwards called _villa_, a country
farm, while _heredium_ stood for a garden; and adds that in old time
_per se hortus ager pauperis erat_. But _hortus_ is to Vergil strictly a
garden, and the old Corycian is cited expressly as a gardener: his land,
we are told, was not suited for growing corn or vines.

The mention of gardening invites me to say a few words on the short
descriptive idyll _Moretum_ which has been regarded as a youthful
composition of Vergil (perhaps from a Greek original) with more justice
than some other pieces attributed to him. I see no strong objection to
admitting it as Vergilian, but it is of course crude and far removed from
the manner and finish of the mature _Georgics_. The peasant Simylus,
_exigui cultor rusticus agri_, is a poor small farmer whose thrift and
industry enable him to make a living ‘in a humble and pottering way,’
as Gilbert puts it. His holding is partly ordinary arable land, but
includes a _hortus_ as well. In the latter he skilfully grows a variety
of vegetables, for which he finds a regular market in the city. Poor
though he is, and accustomed to wait on himself, apparently unmarried,
he yet owns a slave (_famulam_, 93) and she is a negro, fully described
(31-5), woolly hair, thick lips, dark skin, spindle shanks, paddle feet,
etc. She probably would do the house-work, but the preparation of food is
a duty in which her master also bears a part. We hear of no male slave,
and the ploughing of fields and digging the garden are apparently done by
himself singlehanded. The yoke of oxen are mentioned in the last lines.
The picture is such as may have been true of some humble homesteads in
Italy, but the tradition of a Greek original, and the names Simylus and
Scybale, must leave us in some doubt as to whether the scene be really
Italian. The position is in fact much the same as it is in regard to the
_Bucolics_.

Whatever may be the correct view as to the authorship and bearing of
the _Moretum_, there are I think certain conclusions to be drawn from
an examination of the _Georgics_, which it is time to summarize. First,
the tendency of the poem is to advocate a system of smaller holdings and
more intensive cultivation than had for a long period been customary in
a large part of Italy. This reform is rather suggested by implication
than directly urged, though one precept, said to be borrowed[890] from
old Cato, recommends it in plain words. For the glorification of labour
in general is all the while pointing in this direction. Secondly, the
policy of the new Emperor, who posed as Restorer and Preserver rather
than Reformer, finds a sympathetic or obedient expression in this
tendency. For it is delicately conveyed that the reform of an evil
agricultural present virtually consists in the return to the ways of a
better past. And the poet, acting as poet simply, throws on this better
past the halo of a golden age still more remote. The virtues of the
Sabines of old[891] are an example of the happiness and honour attainable
by a rustic folk. But to Vergil, steeped in ancient legend, the historic
worthies of a former age are not the beginning of things. They come
‘trailing clouds of glory’ from the mythical origin[892] of mankind, from
a world of primeval abundance and brotherly communism, a world which
he like Lucretius pauses to portray. Thirdly, the reaction of Augustus
against the bold cosmopolitanism of Julius Caesar has I think left a
mark on the _Georgics_ in the fact that the poem is, as Sellar says, so
thoroughly representative of Italy. Roman Italy was not yet ready to
become merely a part of an imperial estate. If people were to acquiesce
in a monarchy, it had to be disguised, and one important disguise was
the make-believe that the Roman people were lords of the world. A very
harmless method of ministering to Roman self-complacency was excessive
praise of Italy, its soil, its climate, its natural features, its
various products, its races of men and their works, and all the historic
associations of the victorious past. It is a notable fact that this
panegyric[893] breaks out in the utterances of four very dissimilar
works that still survive: for beside the _Georgics_ I must place[894]
the so-called _Roman Antiquities_ of Dionysius, the _Geography_ of
Strabo, and the _de re rustica_ of Varro. These four are practically
contemporaries. It seems to me hardly credible that there was not some
common influence operative at the time and encouraging utterances of this
tone.

The actual success or failure of the attempt to revive Roman agriculture
on a better footing is not only a question of fact in itself historically
important: its determination will throw light on the circumstances in
which Vergil wrote, and perhaps help somewhat in suggesting reasons
for his avoidance of certain topics. If we are to believe Horace[895],
the agricultural policy of Augustus was a grand success: security,
prosperity, virtue, good order, had become normal: fertility had returned
to the countryside. I had better say at once that I put little faith in
these utterances of a court poet. Far more significant is the statement,
preserved by Suetonius[896], of the evils dealt with by Augustus in
country districts. Parties of armed bandits infested the country.
Travellers, slaves and freemen alike, were kidnapped and _ergastulis
possessorum supprimebantur_. He checked the brigandage by armed police
posted at suitable spots, and _ergastula recognovit_. But it is not said
that he did away with them: he cleared out of them the persons illegally
held in bondage (_suppressi_). Not only is rustic slavery in full swing
in the treatise of Varro: some 80 years later the _ergastulum_ is
adopted as a matter of course by Columella, and appears as a canker of
agriculture in the complaints of Pliny. The neglect of rustic industry
is lamented by all three writers, and to the testimony of such witnesses
it is quite needless to add quotations from writers of merely literary
merit. There is no serious doubt that the reconstruction of agriculture
on the basis of small farms tilled by working farmers was at best
successful in a very moderate degree; and this for many a long year.
Organized slave-labour remained the staple appliance of tillage until the
growing scarcity of slaves and the financial policy of the later Empire
brought about the momentous change by which the free farmer gradually
became the predial serf.

Another point to be noted in the _Georgics_ is the absence of any
reference to _coloni_ as tenants under a landlord. Yet we know that
this relation existed in Cicero’s time, and tenant farmers appear in
Varro[897] and Columella[898]. Vergil, but for a stray reference in the
_Aeneid_, might seem never to have heard of the existence of such people.
It is easy to say that the difference between an owner and a tenant is
a difference in law, and unsuited for discussion in a poem. But it also
involves economic problems. The landlord wants a good return on his
capital, the tenant wants to make a good living, and the conditions of
tenancy vary greatly in various cases. The younger Pliny[899] had to
deal with awkward questions between him and his tenants, and there is
no reason to suppose that his case was exceptional. Surely the subject
was one of immediate interest to an agricultural reformer, quite as
interesting as a number of the details set forth here and there in the
_Georgics_; that is, assuming that the author meant his farmer to be
economically prosperous as well as to set a good example. It may be
argued that the operations enjoined on the farmer would greatly improve
the farm and enhance the value of the land, and that no man in his senses
would do this unless the land were his own: there was therefore no need
to discuss tenancy, ownership being manifestly implied. The argument is
fair, so far as it goes. But it does not justify complete silence on what
was probably at the moment a question of no small importance in the eyes
of landowners.

Some passages of Horace may serve to shew that circumstances might
have justified or even invited some reference to this topic. In the
seventh _epistle_ of the first book he tells the story of how Philippus
played a rather scurvy trick on a freedman in a small way of business
as an auctioneer. As a social superior, his patronage turned the poor
man’s head. Taking him for an outing to his own Sabine country place,
he infected him with desire of a rustic life. He amused himself by
persuading him to buy a small farm, offering him about £60 as a gift and
a loan of as much more. The conversion of a regular town-bred man into
a thoroughgoing farmer was of course a pitiful failure. Devotion and
industry availed him nothing. The losses and disappointments incidental
to farming were too much for him. He seems to have had no slave: he
probably had not sufficient capital. He ended by piteously entreating
his patron to put him back into his own trade. The story is placed about
two generations before Horace wrote. But it would be pointless if it
were out of date in its setting, which it surely is not; it might have
happened to a contemporary, nay to Horace himself. It is addressed to his
own patron Maecenas, the generous donor of his own Sabine estate. Here
we have a clear intimation that to buy a little plot and try to get a
living out of it by your own labour was an enterprise in which success
was no easy matter. In the second _satire_ of the second book we have
the case of Ofellus, one of the yeomen of the old school. He had been a
working farmer on his own land, but in the times of trouble his farm had
been confiscated and made over to a discharged soldier. But this veteran
wisely left him in occupation as cultivator on terms. Whether he became
a sort of farm-bailiff, working for the new owner’s account at a fixed
salary, or whether he became a tenant, farming on his own account and
paying a rent, has been doubted. I am strongly of the second opinion.
For it was certainly to the owner’s interest that the land should be
well-farmed, and that his own income (the endowment of his later years)
should be well-secured by giving the farmer every motive for industry.
These considerations do not suit well with the former alternative, which
also makes _colonus_ hardly distinguishable from _vilicus_. Again, the
_colonus_ is on the farm[900] _cum pecore et gnatis_. The _pecus_, like
the children, is surely the farmer’s own, and it is much more likely that
the live-stock should belong to a rent-paying tenant than to a salaried
bailiff. Moreover, there is no mention of slaves. The man works the farm
with the help of his family. Is it likely that he would turn them into a
household of serfs? Therefore I render line 115 _fortem mercede colonum_
‘a sturdy tenant-farmer sitting at a rent’; that is, on a holding that
as owner he formerly occupied rent-free. He can make the farm pay even
now: as for the mere fact of ground-landlordship, that is an idle boast,
and in any case limited by the span of human life. I claim that these
two passages are enough to prove the point for which I am contending;
namely, that questions of the tenure under which agriculture could best
be carried on were matters of some interest and importance about the time
when Vergil was writing the _Georgics_.

But the help of Horace is by no means exhausted. He refers to a story
of a wage-earning labourer (_mercennarius_) who had the luck to turn
up a buried treasure, a find which enabled him to buy the very farm on
which he was employed, and work it as his own. There is no point in
this ‘yarn’ unless it was a well-known tale, part of the current stock
of the day. The famous _satire_ in which it occurs (II 6) seems to be
almost exactly contemporary with the appearance of the _Georgics_. In it
the restful charm of country life is heartily preferred to the worries
and boredom of Rome. His Sabine estate, with its garden, its unfailing
spring of water, and a strip of woodland, is of no great size, but it
is enough: he is no greedy land-grabber. When in Rome he longs for it.
There he can take his ease among spoilt young slaves, born[901] on the
place, keeping a sort of Liberty Hall for his friends. The talk at table
is not _de villis domibusve alienis_ but of a more rational and improving
kind: envy of other men’s wealth is talked out with an apposite fable.
Here we have mention of wage-earning, land-purchase, and slaves. And
the poet’s estate is evidently in the first place a residence, not a
farm worked on strict economic lines. That the number of slave hands
(_operae_) employed there on the Home Farm[902] was eight, we learn
from another _satire_ (II 7 118). To the smart country seats, which
advertise the solid wealth of rich capitalists, he refers in express
terms in _epistles_ I 15 45-6, and by many less particular references.
The land-grabbers are often mentioned, and the forest-lands (_saltus_)
used for grazing, in which much money was invested by men ‘land-proud,’
as a sign of their importance. In short, the picture of rural Italy given
by Horace reveals to us a state of things wholly unfavourable to the
reception of the message of the _Georgics_. When he speaks of _pauper
ruris colonus_ or of _inopes coloni_ he is surely not betraying envy of
these toilers’ lot. Far from it. When enjoying a change in his country
place, he may occasionally divert himself with a short spell[903] of
field-work, at which his neighbours grin. On the other hand the spectacle
of a disreputable freedman, enriched by speculations in time of public
calamity, and enabled through ill-gotten wealth to become a great
landlord, is the cause of wrathful indignation (_epode_ IV). And these
and other candid utterances come from one whose father was a freedman
in a country town, farming in quite a small way, to whose care and
self-denial the son owed the education that equipped him for rising in
the world. Horace indeed is one of the best of witnesses on these points.

There are points on which Vergil and Horace are agreed, though generally
with a certain difference of attitude. Thus, both prefer the country to
the town, but Horace frankly because he enjoys it and likes a rest: he
does not idealize country life as such, still less agricultural labour.
Both disapprove _latifundia_, but Horace on simple commonsense grounds,
not as a reformer. Both praise good old times, but Horace without the
faintest suggestion of possible revival of them, or anything like them.
Both refer to the beginnings of civilization, but Vergil looks back to
a golden age of primitive communism, when _in medium quaerebant_ and
so forth; a state of things ended by Jove’s ordinance that man should
raise himself by toil. Horace, less convinced of the superiority of
the past, depicts[904] the noble savage as having to fight for every
thing, even acorns; and traces steps, leading eventually to law and
order, by which he became less savage and more noble. Horace is nearer
to Lucretius here than Vergil is. Neither could ignore the disturbing
effect of the disbanding of armies and ejectment of farmers to make
way for the settlement of rude soldiers on the land. But to Horace,
personally unconcerned, a cool view was more possible. So, while hinting
at public uneasiness[905] as to the detailed intentions of the new ruler
in this matter, he is able to look at the policy in general merely as
the restoration of weary veterans to a life of peace and the relief of
their chief’s anxieties. Vergil, himself a sufferer, had his little fling
in the _Bucolics_, and was silent[906] in the _Georgics_. Again, Vergil
shuns the function of war as a means of supplying the slave-market. He
knows it well enough, and as a feature of the ‘heroic’ ages the fate of
the captive appears in the _Aeneid_. Horace makes no scruple[907] of
stating the time-honoured principle that a captive is to the conqueror
a valuable asset: there is a market for him as a serviceable drudge,
and not to spare his life is sheer waste. That there may be sarcasm
underlying the passage does not impair its candour. And it distinctly
includes rustic slavery in the words _sine pascat durus aretque_.
Lastly, while both poets praise the restfulness of the countryside with
equal sincerity, it is Horace who recognizes[908] that the working
farmer himself, after his long labours at the plough, looks forward to
retirement and ease when he has saved enough to live on. His is a real
rustic, Vergil’s an ideal.

It will be admitted that all writers are, as sources of evidence, at
their best when they feel free to say or to leave unsaid this or that
according to their own judgment. If there is in the background some
other person whom it is necessary to please, it is very hard to divine
the reason of an author’s frankness, and still more of his reticence.
For instance, the omission of a topic naturally connected with a subject
need not imply that a patron forbade its introduction. I cannot believe
that such a man as Maecenas[909] banned the free mention of slavery in
the _Georgics_. But, if a whole subject is proposed for treatment under
conditions of a well-understood tendency, the writer is not unlikely to
discover that artistic loyalty to that tendency will operate to render
the introduction of this or that particular topic a matter of extreme
difficulty. If the task of Vergil was to recommend a return to a more
wholesome system of agriculture, reference to the labour-question or
to land-tenure bristled with difficulties. My belief is that the poet
shirked these topics, relevant though they surely were, because he did
not see how to treat them without provoking controversy or ill-feeling;
a result which Maecenas and the Emperor were undoubtedly anxious to
avoid. It was simpler and safer not to refer to these things. True, the
omission was a restraint on full-blooded realism. An indistinct picture
was produced, and modern critics have some reason to complain of the
difficulty of understanding many places of the _Georgics_.

Whether chronological considerations may throw any light on the
influences to which this indistinctness is due, and, if so, what is their
exact significance, are very difficult questions, to which I cannot
offer a definite answer. The completion of the _Georgics_ is placed in
the year 30 BC, after seven years more or less spent on composition and
revision. Now it was in that year that the new ruler, supreme since the
overthrow of Antony, organized the great disbandment of armies of which
he speaks in the famous inscription[910] recording the events of his
career. He tells us that he rewarded all the discharged men, either with
assignations of land or with sums of money in lieu thereof. The lands
were bought by him (not confiscated) and the money-payments also were at
his cost (_a me dedi_). Below he refers to the matter again, and adds
that to pay for lands taken and assigned to soldiers was a thing no one
had ever done before. That he paid in all cases, and paid the full market
value, he does not expressly say; Mommsen shews cause for doubting it.
The only remark I have to make is that in the years between Philippi
and Aetium there was plenty of fighting and negotiations. Maecenas was
for most of the time in a position of great trust, and pretty certainly
in touch with all that went on. The fact that a wholesale discharge
of soldiers was surely coming, and that the future of agriculture in
Italy was doubtful, was perhaps not likely to escape the forecast of so
far-sighted a man. Is it just possible that Vergil may have had a hint
from him, to stick to generalities and avoid controversial topics? We are
credibly informed[911] that Maecenas was well rewarded by his master for
his valuable services, and it has been pointed out[912] that his position
of authority offered many opportunities of profitable transactions
on his own account. There is even an express tradition that he was
concerned in the liquidation of one estate. In short, he was one of the
land-speculators of the time. To such a man it would seem not untimely
to praise the virtues of the rustic Romans of old and to recommend their
revival in the coming age; but to call attention to the uncertainties of
the present, involving many awkward problems, would seem imprudent. In
suggesting, doubtfully, that a patron’s restraining hand may have had
something to do with the poet’s reticence, I may be exaggerating the
pressure exercised by the one on the other. But that Maecenas interested
himself in the slowly-growing poem is hardly to be doubted. Early in each
of the four books he is addressed by name. His _haud mollia iussa_ (III
41) may imply nothing more than the general difficulty of Vergil’s task:
but may it not faintly indicate just the least little restiveness under a
guidance that could not be refused openly?

To reject the suggestion of actual interference on Maecenas’ part is not
to say that the _Georgics_ exhibits no deference to his wishes. That many
a veiled hint could be given by a patron in conversation is obvious.
That Maecenas would be a master of that judicious art, is probable
from what we know of his character and career. But, while it is plain
that questions of land-tenure would from his point of view be better
ignored, how would his likes and dislikes affect the mention of slavery
and the labour-question? Here I must refer to the three great writers
on agriculture. Cato, about 150 years earlier, and Columella, about 80
years later, both contemplate the actual buying of land, and insist on
the care necessary in selection. The contemporary Varro seems certainly
to assume purchase. All three deal with slave-labour, Cato like a
hard-fisted _dominus_ of an old-Roman generation just become consciously
imperial and bent on gain, Columella as a skilful organizer of the only
regular supply of labour practically available: Varro, who makes more
allowance[913] for free labour beside that of slaves, reserves the free
man for important jobs, where he may be trusted to use his wits, or for
unhealthy work, in which to risk slaves is to risk your own property.
All the ordinary work in his system is done by slaves. The contemporary
Livy[914] tells us that in his time large districts near Rome had scarce
any free inhabitants left. The elder Pliny, reckoning up the advantages
of Italy for the practice of agriculture, includes[915] among them the
supply of _servitia_, though no man knew better than he what fatal
results had issued from the plantation-system. It is to be borne in mind
that this evidence relates to the plains and the lower slopes of hills,
that is to the main agricultural districts. It is to these parts that
Gardthausen[916] rightly confines his remarks on the desolation of Italy,
which began before the civil wars and was accelerated by them. Other
labour was scarce, and gangs of slaves, generally chained, were almost
the only practicable means of tillage for profit. Speaking broadly, I
think the truth of this picture is not to be denied. If then the word had
gone forth that a return to smaller-scale farming was to be advocated
as a cure for present evils, it was hardly possible to touch on slavery
without some unfavourable reference to the plantation-system. Now surely
it is most unlikely that Maecenas, a cool observer and a thorough child
of the age, sincerely believed in the possibility of setting back the
clock. The economic problem could not be solved so simply, by creating
a wave of ‘back-to-the-land’ enthusiasm. I suggest that he saw no good
to be got by openly endeavouring to recreate the race of small working
farmers by artificial means. Would it be wise to renew an attempt in
which the Gracchi had failed? Now to Vergil, who had passed his youth
in a district of more humane agriculture, the mere praise of farming,
with its rich compensations for never-ending toil and care, would be a
congenial theme. The outcome of their combination was that a topic not
easily idealized in treatment was omitted. The realistic value of the
picture was impaired to the relief of both poet and patron. But what the
poem gained as a beautiful aspiration it lost as a practical authority.

Can we suppose that Vergil did not know how important a place in
contemporary agriculture was filled by slave-labour? I think not: surely
it is inconceivable. What meets us at every turn in other writers
cannot have been unknown to him. Macrobius[917] has preserved for us
a curious record belonging to 43 BC, when the great confiscations and
assignations of land were being carried out in the Cisalpine by order
of the Triumvirs. Money and arms, needed for the coming campaign of
Philippi, were being requisitioned at the same time. The men of property
threatened by these exactions hid themselves. Their slaves were offered
rewards and freedom if they would betray their masters’ hiding-places,
but not one of them yielded to the temptation. The commander who made
the offer was Pollio. No doubt domestics are chiefly meant, but there
were rustic slaves, and we have reason to think that they were humanely
treated in those parts. Dion Cassius[918] tells us that in 41 BC
Octavian, under great pressure from the clamorous armies, saw nothing to
be done but to take all Italian lands from present owners and hand them
over to the soldiers μετά τε τῆς δουλείας καὶ μετὰ τῆς ἄλλης κατασκευῆς.
Circumstances necessitated compromise, which does not concern us here.
But it is well to remember that it was just the best land that the
soldiers wanted, and with it slaves and other farm-stock. For it was a
pension after service, not a hard life of bodily drudgery, that was in
view. The plan of letting the former owner stay on as a tenant has been
referred to above.

I hold then that Vergil’s silence on the topics to which I have called
attention, however congenial it may have been to him, was intentional:
and that the poem, published _in honorem Maecenatis_[919], was limited
as to its practical outlook with the approval, if not at the suggestion,
of the patron. It is essentially a literary work. In it Vergil’s power
of gathering materials from all quarters and fusing them into a whole
of his own creation is exemplified to a wonderful degree. His own deep
love of the country, with its homely sights and sounds, phenomena of a
Nature whose laws he felt unable to explore, helped him to execute the
task of recommending a social and economic reform through the medium of
poetry. By ignoring topics deemed unsuitable, he left his sympathies
and enthusiasm free course, and without sympathies and enthusiasm the
_Georgics_ would not have been immortal. Even when digressing from
agriculture, as in his opening address to the Emperor, there is more
sincerity than we are at first disposed to grant. He had not been a
Republican, like Horace, and probably had been from the first attached to
the cause of the Caesars.

I can discover no ground for thinking[920] that Vergil was ever himself
a farmer. That Pliny and Columella cite him as an authority is in my
opinion due to the predominance of his works in the literary world. As
writers of prose dealing with facts often of an uninspiring kind, it
would seem to raise the artistic tone of heavy paragraphs if the first
name in Latin literature could be introduced with an apposite quotation
in agreement with their own context. Vergil-worship began early and
lasted long; and indeed his admirers in the present day are sometimes so
absorbed in finding[921] more and more in what he said that they do not
trouble themselves to ask whether there may not be some significance[922]
in his silences. Rightly or wrongly, I am persuaded that this question
ought at least to be asked in connexion with the _Georgics_. I have
reserved till the last a passage[923] of Seneca, in which he challenges
the authority of Vergil in some points connected with trees, speaking of
him as _Vergilius noster, qui non quid verissime sed quid decentissime
diceretur aspexit, nec agricolas docere voluit sed legentes delectare_.
Now Seneca was devoted to the works of Vergil, and is constantly quoting
them. He has no prejudice against the poet. The view of the _Georgics_
set forth in these words implies no literary dispraise, but a refusal to
let poetic excellence give currency to technical errors. Seneca is often
tiresome, but in this matter his criticism is in my opinion sound. In the
matter of labour my contention is not that the poet has inadvertently
erred, but that he has for some reason deliberately dissembled.


XXX. THE ELDER SENECA AND OTHERS.

The comparatively silent interval, between the Augustan circle and
the new group of writers under Claudius and Nero, furnishes little of
importance. The one writer who stands out as giving us a few scraps of
evidence is the =elder Seneca=, the earliest of the natives of Spain who
made their mark in Latin literature. But the character of his work, which
consists of examples of the treatment of problem-cases in the schools of
rhetoric, makes him a very peculiar witness. When he tells us how this
or that pleader of note made some point neatly, the words have their
appropriate place in the texture of a particular argument. Often they
contain a fallacious suggestion or a misstatement useful for the purpose
of _ex parte_ advocacy, but having as statements no authority whatever.
Still there are a few references of significance and value. Thus, when
the poor man’s son refuses the rich man’s offer to adopt him, and his own
father approves the proposal, one rhetorician made the young man[924]
say ‘Great troops of slaves whom their lord does not know by sight, and
the farm-prisons echoing to the sound of the lash, have no charm for me:
my love for my father is an unbought love.’ Again, a poor man, whose
property has been outrageously damaged by a rich neighbour, protests[925]
against the whims of modern luxury. ‘Country districts’ he says ‘that
once were the plough-lands of whole communities are now each worked by
a single slave-gang, and the sway of stewards is wider than the realms
of kings.’ Now, we cannot cite the old rhetorician as an authority on
agriculture directly: but he gives us proof positive that references to
estates worked by gangs[926] of slaves, and the _ergastula_ in which the
poor wretches were shut up after the hours of labour, would not in his
time sound strange to Roman audiences. Another passage[927] touches on a
very typical lecture-room theme, an unnatural son. A father is banished
for unintentional homicide. The law forbids the sheltering and feeding
of an exile. But the father contrives to return and haunt an estate
adjoining the main property, now controlled by his son. The son hears
of these visits, flogs the _vilicus_ for connivance, and compels him to
exclude the old man. The piece is one of which only a brief abstract
remains, but there is enough to shew that, while the gist of it was a
casuistic discussion of a moral problem, it assumes as a matter of course
the liability of a trusted slave to the lash. The faithful and kindly
slave is contrasted with the unnatural son. There are in these curious
collections other utterances indicative of the spread of humanitarian
notions. Thus in the piece first cited[928] above, the poor man’s son in
refusing the rich man’s offer of adoption, as a situation to which he
could never accommodate himself, is made to add ‘If you were selling a
favourite slave, you would inquire whether the buyer was a cruel man.’
Such ideas come from the later Greek philosophies, chiefly Stoic, the
system on which Seneca brought up his more famous son. In one place[929]
we find an echo of an earlier Greek sentiment, when a rhetorician
propounds the doctrine that Fortune only, not Nature, distinguishes
freemen from slaves.

Indeed it is evident, from the many passages that touch on slavery and
expose some of its worst horrors, that the subject was at this time
beginning to attract more general attention than heretofore. And the
relations of patron and freedman, also discussed in these artificial
school-debates, are a further illustration of this tendency. Milder
and more humane principles were germinating, though as yet they had
not found expression in law. In arguing on a peculiarly revolting case
(the deliberate mutilation of child-beggars) a speaker incidentally
refers[930] to wealthy landowners recruiting their slave-gangs by seizing
freemen. The hearers are supposed to receive this reference to kidnapping
as no exceptional thing extravagantly suggested. We have seen that both
Augustus and Tiberius had to intervene to put down this _suppressio_.
One little note of interest deserves passing mention. In a discussion on
unequal marriages the question is raised whether even the very highest
desert on a slave’s part could justify a father in taking him as a
son-in-law. A speaker cites the case[931] of Old Cato, who married the
daughter of his own _colonus_. Here we clearly have the tenant farmer in
the second century BC In Plutarch the man appears as a client. Neither
writer makes him a freedman in so many words. But it is probably the
underlying fact. That the daughter was _ingenua_ does not rule out this
supposition.

=Velleius= and =Valerius Maximus= also belong to the reign of Tiberius.
The former in what remains of his history supplies nothing to my purpose.
Valerius made a collection of anecdotes from Roman and foreign histories
illustrating various virtues and vices, classifying the examples of good
and bad action under heads. They are ‘lifted’ from the works of earlier
writers: many are taken from Livy, already used as a classic quarry.
The book is pervaded by tiresome moralizing, and points of interest are
few. There is the story of the farm[932] of Regulus, of the patriotic
refusal[933] of M’ Curius to take more than the normal seven _iugera_ of
land as a reward from the state, of the horny-handed rustic voter[934]
being asked whether he walked on his hands; also reference to the simple
habits of the famous Catos, and a passing remark that the men of old had
few slaves. Those of the above passages that are of any value at all
have been noticed in earlier sections. The freedman =Phaedrus= gives us
next to nothing in his fables, unless we care to note the items[935]
of a farm-property, _agellos pecora villam operarios boves iumenta et
instrumentum rusticum_, and a fable specially illustrating the fact that
a master’s eye sees what escapes the notice of the slave-staff, even of
the _vilicus_.


XXXI. SENECA THE YOUNGER.

The chief literary figure of the reigns of Claudius and Nero was =L
Annaeus Seneca=, a son of the rhetorician above referred to, and like
his father born in Spain. His life extended from 4 BC to 65 AD. For the
purpose of the present inquiry his surviving works are mainly of interest
as giving us in unmistakeable tones the point of view from which a man of
Stoic principles regarded slavery as a social institution. The society of
imperial Rome, in which he spent most of his life, was politically dead.
To meddle with public affairs was dangerous. Even a senator needed to
walk warily, for activity was liable to be misinterpreted by the Emperor
and by his powerful freedmen[936], who were in effect Imperial Ministers.
To keep on good terms with these departmental magnates, who had sprung
from the slave-market to be courted as the virtual rulers of freeborn
Roman citizens, was necessary for all men of note. Under such conditions
it is not wonderful that the wealthy were tempted to assert themselves in
ostentatious luxury and dissipation: for a life of careless debauchery
was on the face of it hardly compatible with treasonable conspiracy. The
immense slave-households of Rome were a part and an expression of this
extravagance; and the fashion of these domestic armies was perhaps at its
height in this period. Now, nothing kept the richer Romans in subjection
more efficiently than this habit of living constantly exposed to the
eyes and ears of their menials. Cruel laws might protect the master from
assassination by presuming[937] the guilt of all slaves who might have
prevented it. They could not protect him from the danger of criminal
charges, such as treason[938], supported by servile evidence: indeed the
slave was a potential informer, and a hated master was at the mercy of
his slaves. Under some Emperors this possibility was a grim reality, and
no higher or more heartfelt praise could be bestowed[939] on an Emperor
than that he refused to allow masters to be done to death by the tongue
of their slaves.

Meanwhile the slave was still legally[940] his (or her) master’s
chattel, and cases of revolting cruelty[941] and other abominations
occurred from time to time. Yet more humane and sympathetic views were
already affecting public sentiment, chiefly owing to the spread of
Stoic doctrines among the cultivated classes. Of these doctrines as
adapted to Roman minds Seneca was the leading preacher. Thus he cites
the definition of ‘slave’ as ‘wage-earner for life,’ propounded[942] by
Chrysippus: he insists on the human quality common to slave and free
alike: he reasserts the equality of human rights, only upset by Fortune,
who has made one man master of another: he sees that the vices of slaves
are very often simply the result of the misgovernment of their owners: he
reckons them as humble members[943] of the family circle, perhaps even
the former playmates of boyhood: he recommends a kindly consideration
for a slave’s feelings, and admits[944] that some sensitive natures
would prefer a flogging to a box on the ear or a harsh and contemptuous
scolding. We need not follow up his doctrines in more detail. The
general tone is evident and significant enough. But it is the relations
of the domestic circle that he has primarily in view. His references
to agriculture and rustic labour are few, as we might expect from the
circumstances of his life. But we are in a better position to judge
their value having considered his attitude towards slavery in general.
It should be noted, as a specimen of his tendency to Romanize Greek
doctrine, that he lays great stress on the more wholesome relations[945]
of master and slave in the good old times of early Rome,—here too without
special reference to the rustic households of the rude forefathers round
which tradition centred.

Judged by a modern standard, a defect in Stoic principles was the
philosophic aloofness from the common interests and occupations of
ordinary workaday life. To the Wise Man all things save Virtue are more
or less indifferent, and in the practice of professions and trades there
is little or no direct connexion with Virtue. Contempt for manual labour,
normal in the ancient world and indeed in all slaveowning societies, took
a loftier position under the influence of Stoicism. Hence that system,
in spite of its harsh and tiresome features, appealed to many of the
better Romans of the upper class, seeming as it did to justify their
habitual disdain. Seneca’s attitude towards handicrafts is much the same
as Cicero’s, only with a touch of Stoic priggishness added. Wisdom, he
says[946], is not a mere handworker (_opifex_) turning out appliances for
necessary uses. Her function is more important: her craft is the art of
living, and over other arts she is supreme. The quality of an artist’s
action[947] depends on his motive: the sculptor may make a statue for
money or to win fame or as a pious offering. Arts, as Posidonius[948]
said, range from the ‘liberal’ ones to the ‘common and mean’ ones
practised by handworkers: the latter have no pretence of moral dignity.
Indeed many of these trades are quite unnecessary, the outcome of
modern[949] extravagance. We could do without them, and be all the better
for it: man’s real needs are small. But to work for a living is not in
itself a degradation: did not the Stoic master Cleanthes draw water[950]
for hire? In short, the Wise Man may be a king or a slave, millionaire or
pauper. The externals cannot change his true quality, though they may be
a help or a hindrance in his growth to perfect wisdom.

In his references to agriculture and country matters it is to be remarked
that Seneca confirms the impression derived from other sources, that the
letting of land to tenant farmers was on the increase. Discoursing on the
greedy luxury of the rich, their monstrous kitchens and cellars, and the
toiling of many to gratify the desires of one, he continues ‘Look at all
the places where the earth is being tilled, and at all the thousands[951]
of farmers (_colonorum_) ploughing and digging; is this, think you, to
be reckoned one man’s belly, for whose service crops are being raised
in Sicily and in Africa too?’ The _coloni_ here mentioned may be merely
‘cultivators’ in a general sense. But I think they are more probably
tenants of holdings on great estates. In speaking of his arrival at his
Alban villa, and finding nothing ready for a meal, he philosophically
refuses to let so small an inconvenience make him angry with his cook
and his baker. ‘My baker[952] has got no bread; but the steward has
some, and so have the porter and the farmer.’ A coarse sort of bread, no
doubt, but you have only got to wait, and you will enjoy it when you are
really hungry. Here we seem to have an instance of what was now probably
an ordinary arrangement: the _villa_, homestead with some land round it,
kept as a country ‘box’ for the master by his steward, who would see to
the garden and other appurtenances, while the rest of the land is let to
a humble tenant farmer. In another passage we have an interesting glimpse
of a tenant’s legal position[953] as against his landlord. ‘If a landlord
tramples down growing crops or cuts down plantations, he cannot keep
his tenant, though the lease may be still in being: this is not because
he has recovered what was due to him as lessor, but because he has made
it impossible for him to recover it. Even so it often happens that a
creditor is cast in damages to his debtor, when he has on other grounds
taken from him more than the amount of the debt claimed.’ I gather from
this passage that damage done by the lessor to the lessee’s interest
in the farm deprived him of right of action against the lessee, in case
he wanted to enforce some claim (for rent or for some special service)
under the terms of the existing contract[954] of lease. If this inference
be just, the evidence is important. For the _colonus_ is conceived as a
humble person, whose interest a brutal inconsiderate landlord would be
not unlikely to disregard, and to whom a resort to litigation would seem
a course to be if possible avoided.

To this question of the rights of landlord and tenant Seneca returns
later, when engaged in reconciling the Stoic thesis that ‘all things
belong to the Wise Man’ with the facts of actual life. The Wise Man is
in the position of a King to whom belongs the general right of sovranty
(_imperium_) while his subjects have the particular right of ownership
(_dominium_). Illustrating the point he proceeds[955] thus. ‘Say I have
hired a house from you. Of its contents some belong to you and some to
me. The thing (_res_) is your property, but the right of user (_usus_)
of your property is mine. Just so you must not meddle with crops, though
grown on your own estate, if your tenant forbids it; and in a season of
dearness or dearth you will be like the man in Vergil wistfully gazing
at another’s plenteous store, though the land where it grew, the yard
where it is stacked, and the granary it is meant to fill, are all your
own property. Nor, when I have hired a lodging, have you a right to enter
it, owner though you be: when a slave of yours is hired for service
by me, you have no right to withdraw him: and, if I hire a trap from
you and give you a lift, it will be a good turn on my part, though the
conveyance belongs to you.’ I have quoted this at some length, in order
to make the farm-tenant’s position quite clear. His rights are presumed
to be easily ascertainable, and his assertion of them will be protected
by the law. His contract, whether a formal lease or not, is also presumed
to guarantee him complete control of the subject for the agreed term.
Whether encroachments by landlords and legal proceedings for redress by
tenants were common events in rural Italy, Seneca need not and does not
say. I suspect that personal interest on both sides was in practice a
more effective restraint than appeals to law.

There are other references to agricultural conditions, which though of
less importance are interesting as confirming other evidence as to the
_latifundia_ of this period. A good specimen is found in his denunciation
of human greed as the cause of poverty, by bringing to an end the
happy age of primitive communism, when all shared the ownership of all.
Cramped and unsatisfied, this _avaritia_ can never find the way back to
the old state of plenty and happiness. ‘Hence, though she now endeavour
to make good[956] what she has wasted; though she add field to field by
buying out her neighbours or wrongfully ejecting them; though she expand
her country estates on the scale of provinces, and enjoy the sense of
landlordism in the power of touring mile after mile without leaving her
own domains; still no enlargement of bounds will bring us back to the
point from whence we started.’ Again, in protesting against the luxurious
ostentation of travellers and others, he shews that they are really in
debt. ‘So-and-so is, you fancy, a rich man ... because he has arable
estates[957] in all provinces of the empire ... because his holding of
land near Rome is on a scale one would grudge him even in the wilds of
Apulia.’ Such a man is in debt to Fortune. In these as in other passages
the preacher illustrates his sermon by references calculated to bring
home his points. Naturally he selects for the purpose matters familiar to
his audience; and it is this alone that makes the passages worth quoting.
The same may be said of his sympathetic reference[958] to the hard lot of
a slave transferred from the easy duties of urban service to the severe
toil of farm labour. In general it may be remarked that the evidence of
Seneca and other literary men of this period is to be taken in connexion
with the treatise of Columella, who is the contemporary specialist
on agriculture. The prevalence of slave labour and the growth of the
tenant-farmer class are attested by both lines of evidence.


XXXII. LUCAN, PETRONIUS, AND OTHERS.

=Lucan=, Seneca’s nephew, has a few interesting references in his poem
on the great civil war. Thus, in the eloquent passage[959] lamenting
the decay of Roman vital strength, a long process to be disastrously
completed in the great Pharsalian battle, he dwells on the shrinkage of
free Roman population in Italy. The towns and the countryside alike are
empty, houses deserted, and it is by the labour of chained[960] slaves
that Italian crops are raised. Elsewhere[961] he looks further back,
and traces this decay to the effect of luxury and corruption caused by
the influx of vast wealth, the spoils of Roman conquests. Among the
symptoms of disease he notes the _latifundia_, which it was now becoming
the fashion to denounce, the land-grabbing passion that prompted men to
monopolize great tracts of land and incorporate in huge estates, worked
by cultivators unknown[962] to them, farms that once had been ploughed
and hoed by the rustic heroes of old. But all such utterances are merely
a part of a declaimer’s stock-in-trade. We may fairly guess that they are
echoes of talk heard in the literary circle of his uncle Seneca. That
they are nevertheless consistent with the land-system of this period, is
to be gathered from other sources, such as Petronius and Columella. It
remains to note that the word _colonus_ is used by Lucan in the senses of
‘cultivator’ and ‘farmer,’ rather suggesting ownership, and of ‘military
colonist,’ clearly implying it. That of ‘tenant’ does not occur: there
was no need for it in the poem. Again, he has _servire servilis_ and
_servitium_, but _servus_ occurs only in a suspected[963] line, and as an
adjective. His regular word for ‘slave’ is _famulus_.

The bucolic poems of this period are too manifestly artificial to serve
as evidence of value. For instance, when =Calpurnius= declares[964] that
in this blessed age of peace and prosperity the _fossor_ is not afraid
to profit by the treasure he may chance to dig up, we cannot infer that
a free digger is meant, though it is hardly likely that a slave would be
suffered to keep treasure-trove.

=Petronius=, in the curious mixed prose-verse satire of which part
has come down to us, naturally says very little bearing directly on
agriculture. But in depicting the vulgar freedman-millionaire Trimalchio
he refers pointedly to the vast landed estates belonging to this typical
figure of the period. He owns estates ‘far as the kites[965] can fly.’
This impression is confirmed in detail by a report delivered by the
agent for his properties. It is a statement[966] of the occurrences in
a domain of almost imperial proportions during a single day. So many
children, male and female, were born: so many thousand bushels of wheat
were stocked in the granary: so many hundred oxen broken in: a slave was
crucified for disloyalty to his lord: so many million sesterces were
paid in to the chest, no opening for investment presenting itself. On
one park-estate (_hortis_) there was a great fire, which began in the
steward’s house. Trimalchio cannot recall the purchase of this estate,
which on inquiry turns out to be a recent acquisition not yet on the
books. Then comes the reading of notices issued by officials[967] of the
manors, of wills[968] made by rangers, of the names of his stewards; of
a freedwoman’s divorce, the banishment of an _atriensis_, the committal
of a cashier for trial, and the proceedings in court in an action between
some chamberlains. Of course all this is not to be taken seriously, but
we can form some notion of the state of things that the satirist has in
mind. Too gross an exaggeration would have defeated his purpose. The book
is full of passages bearing on the history of slavery, but it is domestic
slavery, and that often of the most degrading character.


XXXIII. COLUMELLA.

The great interest taken in agriculture after the establishment of the
Roman peace by Augustus is shewn by the continued appearance of works on
the subject. The treatise of =Celsus=, who wrote in the time of Tiberius,
was part of a great encyclopaedic work. It was probably one of the most
important books of its kind: but it is lost, and we only know it as cited
by other writers, such as Columella and the elder Pliny. It is from the
treatise of =Columella=, composed probably under Nero, that we get most
of our information as to Roman husbandry (_rusticatio_, as he often calls
it) in the period of the earlier Empire. The writer was a native of
Spain, deeply interested, like other Spanish Romans, in the past present
and future of Italy. It is evident that in comparing the present with the
past he could not avoid turning an uneasy eye to the future. Like others,
he could see that agriculture, once the core of Roman strength, the nurse
of a vigorous free population, was in a bad way. It was still the case
that the choicest farm-lands of Italy were largely occupied by mansions
and parks, the property of non-resident owners who seldom visited their
estates, and hardly ever qualified themselves to superintend their
management intelligently. The general result was hideous waste. In modern
language, those who had command of capital took no pains to employ it in
business-like farming: while the remaining free rustics lacked capital.
Agriculture was likely to go from bad to worse under such conditions. The
Empire would thus be weakened at its centre, and to a loyal Provincial,
whose native land was part of a subject world grouped round that centre,
the prospect might well seem bewildering. Columella was from the first
interested in agriculture, on which his uncle[969] at Gades (Cadiz)
was a recognized authority, and his treatise _de re rustica_ is his
contribution to the service of Rome.

The serious consequences of the decay of practical farming, and the
disappearance of the small landowners tilling their own land, had long
been recognized by thoughtful men. But the settlement of discharged
soldiers on allotted holdings had not repopulated the countryside with
free farmers. The old lamentations continued, but no means was found
for solving the problem how to recreate a patient and prosperous yeoman
class, firmly planted on the soil. Technical knowledge had gone on
accumulating to some extent, though the authorities on agriculture, Greek
Carthaginian or Roman, appealed to by Columella are mainly the same as
those cited by Varro some eighty years before. The difficulty at both
epochs was not the absence of knowledge but the neglect of its practical
application. Columella, like his forerunners, insists on the folly[970]
of buying more land than you can profitably manage. But it seems that
the average wealthy landowner could not resist the temptation to round
off[971] a growing estate by buying up more land when a favourable
opportunity occurred. It is even hinted that ill-treatment[972] of a
neighbour, to quicken the process by driving him to give up his land,
was not obsolete. Moreover, great estates often consisted of separate
holdings in different parts of the country. For owners of vast, and
sometimes[973] scattered, estates to keep effective control over them
was an occupation calling for qualities never too common, technical
skill and indefatigable industry. The former could, if combined with
perfect honesty, be found in an ideal deputy; but the deputy, to be under
complete control, must be a slave: and, the more skilled the slave, the
better able he was to conceal dishonesty. Therefore, the more knowledge
and watchful attentiveness was needed in the master. Now it is just this
genuine and painstaking interest in the management of their estates that
Columella finds lacking in Roman landlords. They will not live[974]
in the country, where they are quickly bored and miss the excitements
of the city, and My Lady detests country life even more than My Lord.
But they will not even take the trouble to procure good[975] Stewards,
let alone watching them so as to keep them industrious and honest.
Thus the management of estates has generally passed from masters to
_vilici_, and the domestic part of the duties even more completely from
house-mistresses to _vilicae_. As to the disastrous effect of the change
upon rustic economy, the writer entertains no doubt. But the evil was
no new phenomenon. It may well be that it was now more widespread than
in Varro’s time; but in both writers we may perhaps suspect some degree
of overstatement, to which reformers are apt to resort in depicting
the abuses they are wishing to reform. I do not allow much for this
consideration, for the picture, confirmed by general literary evidence,
is in the main unquestionably true.

So much for the case of estates administered by slave stewards for the
account of their masters. But this was not the only way of dealing with
landed properties. We have already noted the system of letting farms to
cultivating tenants, and commented on the fewness of the references to it
in literature. This plan may have been very ancient in origin, but it was
probably an exceptional arrangement even in the time of Cicero. The very
slight notice of it by Varro indicates that it was not normal, indeed
not even common. In Columella we find a remarkable change. In setting
out the main principles[976] of estate management, and insisting on the
prime importance of the owner’s attention (_cura domini_), he adds that
this is necessary above all things in relation to the persons concerned
(_in hominibus_). Now the _homines_ are _coloni_ or _servi_, and are
unchained or chained. After this division and subdivision he goes on to
discuss briefly but thoroughly the proper relations between landlord and
tenant-farmer, the care needed in the selection of satisfactory tenants,
and the considerations that must guide a landlord in deciding whether to
let a piece of land to a tenant or to farm it for his own account. He
advises him to be obliging and easy in his dealings with tenants, and
more insistent in requiring their work or service (_opus_)[977] than
their rent (_pensiones_): this plan is less irritating, and after all it
pays better in the long run. For, barring risks of storms or brigands,
good farming nearly always leaves a profit, so that the tenant has not
the face to claim[978] a reduction of rent. A landlord should not be a
stickler for trifles or mean in the matter of little perquisites, such as
cutting firewood, worrying his tenant unprofitably. But, while waiving
the full rigour of the law, he should not omit to claim his dues in order
to keep alive his rights: wholesale remission is a mistake. It was well
said by a great landowner that the greatest blessing for an estate is
when the tenants are natives[979] of the place, a sort of hereditary
occupiers, attached to it by the associations of their childhood’s home.
Columella agrees that frequent changes of tenant are a bad business. But
there is a worse; namely the town-bred[980] tenant, who prefers farming
with a slave staff to turning farmer himself. It was a saying of Saserna,
that out of a fellow of this sort you generally get not your rent but a
lawsuit. His advice then was, take pains to get country-bred farmers[981]
and keep them in permanent tenancy: that is, when you are not free to
farm your own land, or when it does not suit your interest to farm it
with a slave staff. This last condition, says Columella, only refers to
the case of lands derelict[982] through malaria or barren soil.

There are however farms on which it is the landlord’s own interest to
place tenants rather than work them by slaves for his own account. Such
are distant holdings, too out-of-the-way for the proprietor to visit them
easily. Slaves out of reach of constant inspection will play havoc with
any farm, particularly one on which corn is grown. They let out the oxen
for hire, neglect the proper feeding of live stock, shirk the thorough
turning of the earth, and in sowing tending harvesting and threshing the
crop they waste and cheat you to any extent. No wonder the farm gets a
bad name thanks to your steward and staff. If you do not see your way
to attend in person to an estate of this kind, you had better let it to
a tenant. From these remarks it seems clear that the writer looks upon
letting land to tenant farmers as no more than an unwelcome alternative,
to be adopted only in the case of farms bad in quality or out of easy
reach. Indeed he says frankly that, given fair average conditions, the
owner can always get better returns by managing a farm himself than by
letting it to a tenant: he may even do better by leaving the charge
to a steward, unless of course that steward happens to be an utterly
careless or thievish fellow. Taking this in connexion with his remarks
about stewards elsewhere, the net result seems to be that a landlord must
choose in any given case what he judges to be the less of two evils.

A few points here call for special consideration. In speaking of the
work or service (_opus_) that a landlord may require of a tenant, as
distinct from rent, what does Columella precisely mean? It has been
held[983] that he refers to the landlord’s right of insisting that
his land shall be well farmed. This presumably implies a clause in
the lease under which such a right could be enforced. But there are
difficulties. In the case of a distant farm, let to a tenant because
it has ‘to do without the presence[984] of the landlord,’ the right
would surely be inoperative in practice. In the case of a neighbouring
farm, why has the landlord not kept it in hand, putting in a steward
to manage it? This interpretation leaves us with no clear picture of
a practical arrangement. But this objection is perhaps not fatal. The
right to enforce proper cultivation is plainly guaranteed to landlords
in Roman Law, as the jurists constantly assert in discussing tenancies.
And _opus_ is a term employed[985] by them in this connexion. It is
therefore the safer course to take it here in this sense, and to allow
for a certain want of clearness in Columella’s phrase. At the same time
it is tempting to accept another[986] view, namely this, that the writer
has in mind service rendered in the form of a stipulated amount of
auxiliary labour on the landlord’s ‘Home Farm’ at certain seasons. That a
_corvée_ arrangement of this kind existed as a matter of course on some
estates, we have direct evidence[987] in the second century, evidence
that suggests an earlier origin for the custom. True, it implies that
landlords were in practice able to impose the burden of such task-work on
their free tenants, in short that they had the upper hand in the bargain
between the parties. But this is not surprising: for we read[988] of a
great landlord calling up his _coloni_ to serve on his private fleet
in the great civil war, a hundred years before Columella. Still, it is
perhaps rash to see in this passage a direct reference to the custom
of making the supply of auxiliary labour at certain seasons a part of
tenant’s obligations. Granting this, it is nevertheless reasonable to
believe that the first beginnings of the custom may belong to a date at
least as early as the treatise of Columella. For it is quite incredible
that such a practice should spring up and become prevalent suddenly. It
has all the marks of gradual growth.

Another point of interest is the criticism of the town-bred _colonus_. He
prefers to work the farm with a slave staff, rather than undertake the
job himself. I gather from this that he is a man with capital, also that
he means to get a good return on his capital. He fears to make a loss on
a rustic venture, being well aware of his own inexperience. So he will
put in a steward with a staff of slaves. The position of the steward will
in such a case be peculiarly strong. If he is slack and thievish and lets
down the farm, he can stave off his master’s anger by finding fault with
the soil or buildings, and involve the tenant and landlord in a quarrel
over the rent. To devise pretexts would be easy for a rogue, and a
quarrel might end in a lawsuit. That Saserna, writing probably about 100
BC, laid his finger on this possible source of trouble, is significant.
It is evidence that there were tenant-farmers in his time, and bad ones
among them: but not that they were then numerous, or that their general
character was such as to make landlords let their estates in preference
to managing them through their own stewards for their own account. And
this agrees with Columella’s own opinion some 150 years later. If you are
to let farms to tenants, local men who are familiar with local conditions
are to be preferred, but he gives no hint that such tenants could readily
be found. His words seem rather to imply that they were rare.

One point is hardly open to misunderstanding. In Columella’s system the
typical tenant-farmer, the _colonus_ to be desired by a wise landlord, is
a humble person, to whom small perquisites are things of some importance.
He is not a restless or ambitious being, ever on the watch for a chance
of putting his landlord in the wrong or a pretext for going to law. Such
as we see him in the references of Seneca, and later in those of the
younger Pliny and Martial, such he appears in Columella. For the landlord
it is an important object to keep him—when he has got him—and to have his
son ready as successor in the tenancy. From other sources we know[989]
that the value of long undisturbed tenancies are generally recognized.
But we have little or nothing to shew whether the tenant-farmers of
this age usually worked with their own hands or not. That they employed
slave labour is not only _a priori_ probable, but practically certain.
We have evidence that at a somewhat later date it was customary[990]
for the landlord to provide land farmstead (_villa_) and equipment
(_instrumentum_), and we know that under this last head slaves could be
and were concluded. It is evident that the arrangement belongs to the
decisive development of the tenancy system as a regular alternative to
that of farming by a steward for landlord’s own account. The desirable
country-bred tenant would not be a man[991] of substantial capital,
and things had to be made easy for him. It is not clear that a tenant
bringing his own staff of slaves would have been welcomed as lessee: from
the instance of the town-bred _colonus_ just referred to it seems likely
that he would not.

While Columella prescribes letting to tenants as the best way of solving
the difficulties in dealing with outlying farms, he does not say that
this plan should not be adopted in the case of farms near the main
estate or ‘Home Farm.’ I think this silence is intentional. It is hard
to believe that there were no instances of landlords either wholly
non-resident or who so seldom visited their estates that they could not
possibly keep an eye on the doings of stewards. In such cases there would
be strong inducement to adopt the plan by which they could simply draw
rents and have no stewards to look after. That stewards needed to be
carefully watched was as clear to Columella as to Cato or Varro. True,
letting to tenants was a policy liable to bring troubles of its own. We
shall see in the case of the younger Pliny what they were and how he met
them. Meanwhile he may serve as an example of the system. It is also
plain that a large continuous property could be divided[992] into smaller
parcels for convenience of letting to tenants. Whether the later plan of
keeping a considerable Home Farm in hand under a steward, and letting off
the outer parcels of the same estate to tenants, was in vogue already and
contemplated by Columella, is not easy to say. In connexion with this
question it is to be noted that he hardly refers at all to free hired
labour[993] as generally available. The migratory gangs of wage-earners,
still known to Varro, do not appear, nor do the itinerant _medici_. When
he speaks of hiring hands at any price, or of times when labour is cheap,
he may mean hiring somebody’s slaves, and probably does. Slave labour is
undoubtedly the basis of his farm-system, and its elaborate organization
fills an important part of his book. Yet two marked consequences of
the Roman Peace had to be taken into account. Fewer wars meant fewer
slaves in the market, and a rise of prices: peace and law in Italy meant
that big landowners could add field to field more securely than ever,
while great numbers of citizens were settling in the Provinces, taking
advantage of better openings[994] there. To keep some free labour within
call as an occasional resource was an undeniable convenience for a large
owner with a farm in hand. Small tenants[995] under obligation to render
stipulated service at certain seasons would obviously supply the labour
needed. And, if we picture to ourselves a Home Farm round the lord’s
mansion, worked by steward and slave staff, with outlying ‘soccage’
tenants on holdings near, we are already in presence of a rudimentary
Manor. As time went by, and the system got into regular working order,
the landlord had an opportunity of strengthening his hold on the tenants.
By not pressing them too severely for arrears of rent, and occasionally
granting abatements, he could gradually increase their services. What
he thus saved on his own labour-bill might well be more than a set-off
against the loss of money-rents. More and more the tenants would become
dependent on him. Nominally free, they were becoming tied to the soil on
onerous terms, and the foundation was laid of the later relation of Lord
and Serf.

Such I conceive to be the rustic situation the beginnings of which are
probably to be placed as early as Columella’s time, though we do not
find him referring to it. He says nothing of another point, which was
of importance[996] later, namely the admission of slaves or freedmen as
tenants of farms. It has all the appearance of a subsequent step, taken
when the convenience of services rendered by resident tenants had been
demonstrated by experience. It is no great stretch of imagination to
suggest that, as the supply of slaves fell off, it was the policy of
owners to turn their slave-property to the best possible account. When a
steward or a gang-foreman was no longer in his prime, able (as Columella
enjoins) to turn to and shew the common hands how work should be done,
how could he best be utilized? A simple plan was to put him on a small
farm with a few slave labourers. This would secure the presence of a
tenant whose dependence was certain from the first, while a younger man
could be promoted to the arduous duties of the big Home Farm. Be this
as it may, it is certain that problems arising from shortage of slaves
were presenting themselves in the middle of the first century AD. For
slave-breeding, casual in Cato’s day and incidentally mentioned by Varro,
is openly recognized by Columella, who allows for a larger female element
in his farm staff and provides rewards for their realized fertility.

If the system of farm-tenancies was already becoming a part of
land-management so important as the above remarks may seem to imply, why
does the management of a landed estate for landlord’s account under a
steward occupy almost the whole of Columella’s long treatise? I think
there are several reasons. First, it is management of tillage-crops and
gardens and live stock with which he is chiefly concerned, not tenures
and labour-questions: and technical skill in agriculture is of interest
to all connected with it, though the book is primarily addressed to
landlords. Secondly, the desirable tenant was (and is) a man not much in
need of being taught his business: as for an undesirable one, the sooner
he is got rid of the better. Thirdly, the plan of steward-management was
still the normal one: the only pity was that the indolence of owners
led to appointment of bad stewards and left them too much power. Only
sound knowledge can enable landlords to choose good stewards and check
bad management. Seeing agriculture in a bad way, Columella writes to
supply this knowledge, as Cato Varro and others had done before him.
Accordingly he begins with the general organization of the normal large
estate, and first discusses the choice and duties of the _vilicus_,
on whose character and competence everything depends. To this subject
he returns in a later part of the treatise, and the two passages[997]
enforce the same doctrine with very slight variations in detail.

The steward[998] must not be a fancy-slave, a domestic from the master’s
town house, but a well-tried hardy rustic, or at the very least one used
to hard labour. He must not be too old, or he may break down under the
strain; nor too young, or the elder slaves will not respect him. He must
be a skilled farmer (this is most important)[999], or at least thoroughly
painstaking, so as to pick up the business quickly: for the functions
of teaching and giving orders cannot be separated. He need not be able
to read and write, if his memory be very retentive. It is a remark of
Celsus, that a steward of this sort brings his master cash more often
than a book: for he cannot make up false accounts himself, and fears to
trust an accomplice. But, good bad or indifferent, a steward must have
a female partner[1000] allotted him, to be a restraining influence on
him and in some respects a help. Being[1001] his master’s agent, he must
be enjoined not to live on terms of intimacy with any of the staff, and
still less with any outsider. Yet he may now and then invite a deserving
worker to his table on a feast-day. He must not do sacrifice[1002]
without orders, or meddle with divination. He must attend markets
only on strict business, and not gad about, unless it be to pick up
wrinkles[1003] for the farm, and then only if the place visited be close
at hand. He must not allow new pathways to be made on the farm, or admit
as guests any but his master’s intimate friends. He must be instructed
to attend carefully[1004] to the stock of implements and tools, keeping
everything in duplicate and in good repair, so that there need be no
borrowing from neighbours: for the waste of working time thus caused
is a more serious item than the cost of such articles. He is to see to
the clothing[1005] of the staff (_familiam_) in practical garments that
will stand wet and cold: this done, some work in the open is possible in
almost any weather. He should be not only an expert in farm labour, but
a man of the highest mental and moral character[1006] compatible with
a slave-temperament. For his rule should be sympathetic but firm: he
should not be too hard[1007] upon the worse hands, while he encourages
the better ones, but aim at being feared for his strictness rather than
loathed for harshness. The way to achieve this is to watch and prevent,
not to overlook and then punish. Even the most inveterate rogues are
most effectively controlled by insisting on performance[1008] of their
tasks, ensuring them their due rights, and by the steward being always
on the spot. Under these conditions the various foremen[1009] will take
pains to carry out their several duties, while the common hands, tired
out, will be more inclined to go to sleep than to get into mischief. Some
good old usages tending to promote content and good feeling are unhappily
gone beyond recall, for instance[1010] the rule that a steward must not
employ a fellow-slave’s services on any business save that of his master.
But he must not suffer them to stray off the estate unless he sends them
on errands; and this only if absolutely necessary. He must not do any
trading[1011] on his own account, or employ his master’s cash in purchase
of beasts etc. For this distracts a steward’s attention, and prevents the
correct balancing of his accounts at the audit, when he can only produce
goods instead of money. In general, the first[1012] requisite is that he
should be free from conceit and eager to learn. For in farming mistakes
can never be redeemed: time lost is never regained: each thing must be
done right, once for all.

The above is almost a verbal rendering of Columella’s words. At this
point we may fairly pause to ask whether he seriously thought that an
ordinary landlord had much chance of securing such a paragon of virtue
as this pattern steward. That all these high bodily mental and moral
qualities combined in one individual could be bought in one lot at an
auction[1013] must surely have been a chance so rare as to be hardly
worth considering as a means of agricultural development. I take it
that the importance of extreme care in selecting the right man, and
in keeping him to his duties, is insisted on as a protest against the
culpable carelessness of contemporary landlords, of which he has spoken
severely above. If, as I believe, in the great majority of cases a new
steward required much instruction as to the details of his duties and as
to the spirit in which he was both to rule the farm-staff and to serve
his master, surely the part to be played by the master himself[1014] was
of fundamental importance: indeed little less so than in the scheme of
old Cato. To Columella I am convinced that his recommendations stood for
an ideal seldom, if ever, likely to be realized. To say this is not to
blame the good man, but rather to hint that his precepts in general must
not be taken as evidence of a state of things then normally to be found
existing on farms. To express aspirations confesses the shortcomings of
achievement.

To return to our author’s precepts. He goes on to tell us of his own way
of treating[1015] his farm-hands, remarking that he has not regretted
his kindness. He talks to a rustic slave (provided he is a decent
worker) more often, and more as man to man (_familiarius_) than he does
to a town slave. It relieves the round of their toil. He even exchanges
pleasantries with them. He discusses new work-projects with the skilled
hands and so tests their abilities: this flatters them, and they are
more ready to work on a job on which they have been consulted. There
are other points of management on which all prudent masters are agreed,
for instance the inspection[1016] of the slaves in the lock-up. This
is to ascertain whether they are carefully chained, and the chamber
thoroughly secured, and whether the steward has chained or released any
of them without his master’s knowledge. For he must not be permitted
to release the chained on his own responsibility. The _paterfamilias_
should be all the more particular in his inquiries as to slaves of this
class, to see that they are dealt with fairly in matters of clothing
and rations, inasmuch as they are under the control[1017] of several
superiors, stewards foremen and warders. This position exposes them to
unfair treatment, and they are apt to be more dangerous through resenting
harshness and stinginess. So a careful master should question them as
to whether they are getting[1018] their due allowance. He should taste
their food and examine their clothes etc. He should hear and redress
grievances, punish the mutinous, and reward the deserving. Columella then
relates[1019] his own policy in dealing with female slaves. When one of
them had reared three or more children she was rewarded: for 3 she was
granted a holiday, for 4 she was manumitted. This is only fair, and it is
a substantial increment[1020] to your property. In general, a landlord
is enjoined to observe religious duties, and to inspect the whole estate
immediately on his arrival from Town, checking all items carefully. This
done regularly year after year, he will enjoy order and obedience on his
estate in his old age.

Next comes a general statement of the proper classification of the
slave staff according to varieties[1021] of function. For departmental
foremen you should choose steady honest fellows, watchfulness and skill
being needed rather than brute strength. The hind or plowman must be a
big man with a big voice, that the oxen may obey him. And the taller
he is the better will he throw his weight on the plough-tail. The mere
unskilled labourer[1022] only needs to be fit for continuous hard work.
For instance, in a vineyard you want a thickset type of labourer to
stand the digging etc, and if they are rogues it does not matter much,
as they work in a gang under an overseer (_monitore_[1023]). By the by,
a scamp is generally more quick-witted than the average, and vineyard
work calls for intelligence: this is why chained hands[1024] are commonly
employed there. Of course, he adds, an honest man is more efficient than
a rogue, other things being equal: don’t charge me with a preference
for criminals. Another piece of advice is to avoid[1025] mixing up the
various tasks performed by the staff on the plan of making every labourer
do every kind of work. It does not pay in farming. Either what is every
one’s business is felt to be nobody’s duty in particular; or the effort
of the individual is credited to the whole of the gang. This sets him
shirking, and yet you cannot single out the offender; and this sort of
thing is constantly happening. Therefore keep plowmen vineyard-hands and
unskilled labourers apart. Then he passes to numerical[1026] divisions.
Squads (_classes_) should be of not more than ten men each, _decuriae_
as the old name was, that the overseer may keep his eye on all. By
spreading such squads over different parts of a large farm it is possible
to compare results, to detect laziness, and to escape the irritating
unfairness of punishing the wrong men.

The general impression left on a reader’s mind by Columella’s principles
of slave-management is one of strict control tempered by judicious
humanity. It pays not to be harsh and cruel. Whether we can fairly credit
him with disinterested sympathy on grounds of a common human nature, such
as Seneca was preaching, seems to me very doubtful. That he regarded
the slave as a sort of domesticated animal, cannot so far as I know be
gathered from direct statements, but may be inferred by just implication
from his use of the same language in speaking of slaves and other live
stock. Thus we find[1027] the ‘labouring herd,’ and ‘draught-cattle when
they are putting in a good spell of work.’ So too the steward is to drive
home his slave-gang at dusk ‘after the fashion[1028] of a first-rate
herdsman,’ and on arrival first of all to attend to their needs ‘like a
careful shepherd.’ The motive of this care is to keep the staff in good
working order. Both steward and stewardess are required to pay great
attention to the health of the staff. Not only are there prescriptions
given for treatment of ailments and injuries, but the slave really stale
from overwork is to have a rest; of course malingering must be checked.
For the sick there is a special[1029] sick-room, always kept clean and
aired, and the general sanitation of the farmstead is strictly enforced.
This too is dictated by enlightened self-interest, a part of the general
rule[1030] that upkeep is as important as acquisition. The position of
the female staff of the farm has also a bearing on this subject. They do
not appear to be numerous, though perhaps proportionally more so than in
the scheme of Varro. The _vilica_ has a number of maids under her for
doing the various house-work[1031] and spinning and weaving. We have
already noted the rewards of fertility on their part. For the production
of home-bred slaves (_vernae_), always a thing welcomed by proprietors,
is most formally recognized by Columella. Why it needed encouragement
may perhaps receive some illustration from remarks upon the behaviour of
certain birds in the matter of breeding. Thus peafowl do well in places
where they can run at large, and the hens take more pains to rear their
chicks, being so to speak[1032] set free from slavery. And other birds
there are that will not breed in captivity. The analogy of these cases to
that of human slaves can hardly have escaped the notice of the writer.

The distinction between the slaves who are chained and those who are not
appears the more striking from Columella’s references to the lock-up
chamber or slave-prison. His predecessors pass lightly over this matter,
but he gives it the fullest recognition. The _ergastulum_ should be a
chamber[1033] below ground level, as healthy as you can get, lighted by
a number of slits in the wall so high above the floor as to be out of
a man’s reach. This dungeon is only for the refractory slaves, chained
and constantly inspected. For the more submissive ones cabins (_cellae_)
are provided in healthy spots near their work but not so scattered as to
make observation difficult. There is even a bath house[1034], which the
staff are allowed to use on holidays only: much bathing is weakening.
Whether on an average farm the chained or unchained slaves are assumed
to be the majority is not quite clear; probably the unchained, to judge
by the general tone of the precepts. But that a lock-up is part of the
normal establishment is clear enough. And it is to be noted that in one
passage[1035] _ergastula_ are mentioned in ill-omened juxtaposition
with citizens enslaved by their creditors. Whether it is implied
that unhappy debtors were still liable to be locked up as slaves in
creditors’ dungeons as of old, is not easy to say. Columella is capable
of rhetorical flourishes now and then. It is safer to suppose that he is
referring to two forms of slave-labour; first, the working off arrears of
debt[1036] by labour of a servile kind; second, the wholesale slave-gang
system suggested by the significant word _ergastula_. Or are we to read
into it a reference to the kidnapping[1037] of wayfarers which Augustus
and Tiberius had striven to put down? Before we leave the subject of
the slave-staff it is well to note that no prospect of freedom is held
out, at least to the males. Fertility, as we have seen, might lead to
manumission of females. But we are not told what use they were likely
to make of their freedom, when they had got it. My belief is that they
stayed on the estate as tolerated humble dependants; for they would
have no other home. Some were natives of the place, and the imported
ones would have lost all touch with their native lands. Perhaps the
care of poultry[1038] is a specimen of the various minor functions in
which they could make themselves useful. At all events they were free
from fetters and the lash. And the men too may have been occasionally
manumitted on the same sort of terms. Silence does not prove a negative.
For instance, we hear of _peculium_, the slave’s quasi-property, only
incidentally[1039] as being derived from _pecus_. Yet we are not entitled
to say that slaves were not free to make savings under the system of
Columella.

Though the _vilicus_ appears in this treatise as the normal head of
the management, there are signs that this was not the last word in
estate-organization. That he is sometimes[1040] referred to as being the
landlord’s agent (_actor_), but usually not, rather suggests that he
could be, and often was, confined to a more restricted sphere of duty,
namely the purely agricultural superintendence of the farm in hand. This
would make him a mere farm-bailiff, directing operations on the land,
but with little or no responsibility for such matters as finance. And
in a few passages we have mention of a _procurator_. This term must be
taken in its ordinary sense[1041] as signifying the landlord’s ‘attorney’
or full legal representative. He is to keep an eye on the management,
for instance[1042] the threshing-floor, if the master is not at hand.
The position of his quarters indicates his importance: as the steward’s
lodging is to be where he can watch goings-out and comings-in, so that
of the _procurator_ is to be where[1043] he can have a near view of the
steward as well as doings in general. Judging from the common practice
of the day, it is probable that he would be a freedman. Now, why does
Columella, after referring to him thus early in the treatise, proceed to
ignore him afterwards? The only reasonable explanation that occurs to
me is that the appointment of such an official would only be necessary
in exceptional cases: in short, that in speaking of a _procurator_
he implies an unexpressed reservation ‘supposing such a person to be
employed.’ Circumstances that might lead to such an appointment are not
far to seek. The landlord might be abroad for a long time on public
duty or private business. There might be large transactions pending
(purchases, sales, litigation, etc) in connexion with the estate or
neighbourhood; in the case of a very large estate this was not unlikely.
The estate might be one of several owned by the same lord, and the
_procurator_ intermittently resident on one or other as from time to time
required. Or lastly the services of an agent with full legal powers may
have been desirable in dealing with free tenantry. If a landlord had a
number of tenant farmers on his estates, it is most unlikely that his
_vilici_, slaves as they were, would be able to keep a firm hand[1044] on
them: and the fact of his letting his farms surely suggests that he would
not desire to have much rent-collecting or exaction of services to do
himself.

One point in which Columella’s system seems to record a change from
earlier usage may be found in the comparative disuse of letting out
special jobs to contractors. In one passage[1045], when discussing the
trenching-work required in _pastinatio_, and devices for preventing the
disputes arising from bad execution of the same, he refers to _conductor_
as well as _dominus_. The interests of the two are liable to clash, and
he tries to shew a means of ensuring a fair settlement between the
parties without going to law. I understand the _conductor_ to be a man
who has contracted for the job at an agreed price, and _exactor operis_
just below to be the landlord, whose business it is to get full value for
his money. Thus _conductor_ here will be the same as the _redemptor_ so
often employed in the scheme of Cato. I cannot find further traces of him
in Columella. Nor is the sale of a hanging[1046] crop or a season’s lambs
to a speculator referred to. But we have other authority for believing
that contracts of this kind were not obsolete, and it is probable
that the same is true of contracts for special operations. That such
arrangements were nevertheless much rarer than in Cato’s time seems to be
a fair inference. The manifest reluctance[1047] to hire external labour
also points to the desire of getting, so far as possible, all farming
operations performed by the actual farm-staff. If I have rightly judged
the position of tenant farmers, it is evident that their stipulated
services would be an important help in enabling the landlord to dispense
with employment of contractors’ gangs on the farm. This was in itself
desirable: that the presence of outsiders was unsettling to your own
slaves had long been remarked, and in the more elaborate organization
of Columella’s day disturbing influences would be more apprehensively
regarded than ever.

It is hardly necessary to follow out all the details of this complicated
system and enumerate the various special functions assigned to the
members of the staff. To get good foremen even at high prices was one
of the leading principles: an instance[1048] is seen in the case of
vineyards, where we hear of a thoroughly competent _vinitor_, whose price
is reckoned at about £80 of our money, the estimated value of about 4½
acres of land. The main point is that it is a system of slave labour on
a large scale, and that Columella, well aware that such labour is in
general wasteful, endeavours to make it remunerative by strict order
and discipline. He knows very well that current lamentations over the
supposed exhaustion[1049] of the earth’s fertility are mere evasions of
the true causes of rural decay, neglect and ignorance. He knows that
intensive cultivation[1050] pays well, and cites striking instances. But
the public for whom he writes is evidently not the men on small holdings,
largely market-gardeners[1051], who were able to make a living with or
without slave-help, at all events when within reach of urban markets.
He addresses men of wealth, most of whom were proud of their position
as landlords, but presumably not unwilling to make their estates more
remunerative, provided the effort did not give them too much trouble.
This condition was the real difficulty; and it is hard to believe that
Columella, when insisting on the frequent presence of the master’s eye,
was sanguine enough to expect a general response. His attitude towards
pastoral industry seems decidedly less enthusiastic than that of his
predecessors. Stock[1052] must be kept on the farm, partly to eat off
your own fodder-crops, but chiefly for the sake of supplying manure for
the arable land. In quoting Cato’s famous saying on the profitableness
of grazing, he agrees that nothing pays so quickly as good grazing, and
that moderately good grazing pays well enough. But if, as some versions
have it, he really said that even bad grazing was the next best thing for
a farmer, Columella respectfully dissents. The breeding and fattening of
all manner of animals for luxurious tables[1053] remains much the same as
in the treatise of Varro. A curious caution is given[1054] in discussing
the fattening of thrushes. They are to be fed with ‘dried figs beaten up
with fine meal, as much as they can eat or more. Some people chew the
figs before giving them to the birds. But it is hardly worth while to do
this if you have a large number to feed, for it costs money to hire[1055]
persons to do the chewing, and the sweet taste makes them swallow a good
deal themselves.’ Now, why hire labour for such a purpose? Is it because
slaves would swallow so much of the sweet stuff that your thrushes would
never fatten?

It is well known that importation of corn from abroad led to great
changes in Italian agriculture in the second century BC. The first was
the formation of great estates worked by slave-gangs, which seems to have
begun as an attempt to compete with foreign large-scale farming in the
general production of food-stuffs. If so, it was gradually discovered
that it did not pay to grow cereal crops for the market, unscrupulous
in slave-driving though the master might be. Therefore attention was
turned to the development on a larger scale of the existing culture
of the vine and olive and the keeping of great flocks and herds. Food
for these last had to be found on the farm in the winter, and more and
more it became usual only to grow cereals as fodder for the stock,
of course including the slaves. No doubt there was a demand for the
better sorts, such as wheat, in all the country towns, but the farms
in their immediate neighbourhood would supply the need. That Columella
assumes produce of this kind to be normally consumed on the place,
is indicated by his recommending[1056] barley as good food for all
live-stock, and for slaves when mixed with wheat. Also by his treating
the delicate[1057] white wheat, much fancied in Rome, as a degenerate
variety, not worth the growing by a practical farmer. His instructions
for storage shew the same point of view. The structure and principles
of granaries[1058] are discussed at length, and the possibility of
long storage[1059] is contemplated. The difficulties of transport by
land had certainly been an important influence in the changes of Roman
husbandry, telling against movements of bulky produce. Hence the value
attached[1060] to situations near the seaboard or a navigable stream
(the latter not a condition often to be realized in Italy) by Columella
and his predecessors. Military roads served the traveller as well as the
armies, but took no regard[1061] of agricultural needs. Moreover they had
special[1062] drawbacks. Wayfarers had a knack of pilfering from farms
on the route, and someone or other was always turning up to seek lodging
and entertainment. Thus it was wise not to plant your villa close to
one of these trunk roads, or your pocket was likely to suffer. But to
have a decent approach[1063] by a country road was a great convenience,
facilitating the landlord’s periodical visits and the carriage of goods
to and from the estate.

Certain words call for brief notice. Thus _opera_, the average day’s
work of an average worker, is Columella’s regular labour-unit in terms
of which he expresses the labour-cost[1064] of an undertaking. In no
other writer is this more marked. Occasionally _operae_ occurs in the
well-known concrete sense[1065] of the ‘hands’ themselves. The _magistri_
mentioned are not always the foremen spoken of above, but sometimes[1066]
directors or teachers in a general sense or even as a sort of synonym for
_professores_. To recur once again to _colonus_, the word, as in other
writers, often means simply ‘cultivator,’ not ‘tenant-farmer.’ The latter
special sense occurs in a passage[1067] which would be useful evidence
for the history of farm-tenancies, if it were not doubtful whether the
text is sound.

There remains a question, much more than a merely literary problem, as
to the true relation of Columella to Vergil. That he constantly quotes
the poet, and cites him as an authority on agriculture, is a striking
fact. One instance will shew the deep veneration with which he regards
the great master. In speaking[1068] of the attention to local qualities
of climate and soil needed in choosing an estate, he quotes lines
from the first _Georgic_, the matter of which is quite traditional,
common property. But he speaks of Vergil (to name the poet[1069] was
unnecessary) as a most realistic[1070] bard, to be trusted as an oracle.
Nay, so irresistible is to him the influence of Vergil, that he must
needs cast his own tenth book into hexameter verse: the subject of that
book is gardens, a topic on which Vergil had confessedly[1071] not fully
said his say. And yet in the treatment of the land-question there is a
fundamental difference between the two writers. Columella’s system is
based on slave labour organized to ensure the completest efficiency:
Vergil practically ignores slavery altogether. Columella advises you to
let land to tenant farmers whenever you cannot effectively superintend
the working of slave-organizations under stewards: Vergil ignores this
solution also, and seems vaguely to contemplate a return to the system
of small farms owned and worked by free yeomen in an idealized past.
Columella is concerned to see that capital invested in land is so
employed as to bring in a good economic return: Vergil dreams of the
revival of a failing race, and possible economic success and rustic
wellbeing are to him not so much ends as means. The contrast is striking
enough. In the chapter on Vergil I have already pointed out that the poet
had at once captured the adoration of the Roman world. It was not only in
quotations or allusions, or in the incense of praise, that his supremacy
was held in evidence so long as Latin literature remained alive. His
influence affected prose style also, and subtle reminiscences of
Vergilian flavour maybe traced in Tacitus. But all this is very different
from the practice of citing him as an authority on a special subject, as
Columella did and the elder Pliny did after him.

I would venture to connect this practice with the Roman habit of viewing
their own literature as inspired by Greek models and so tending to move
on parallel lines. Cicero was not content to be a Roman Demosthenes; he
must needs try to be a Roman Plato too, if not also a Roman Aristotle.
Now citation of the Homeric poems as a recognized authority on all
manner of subjects, not to mention casual illustrations, runs through
Greek literature. Plato and Aristotle are good instances. It is surely
not surprising that we find Roman writers patriotically willing to cite
their own great poet, more especially as the _Georgics_ lay ready to
hand. In the next generation after Columella, Quintilian framed his
criticism[1072] of the two literatures (as food for oratorical students)
on frankly parallel lines. Vergil is the pair to Homer: second to
the prince of singers, but a good second: and he is quoted and cited
throughout the treatise as Homer is in Aristotle’s _Rhetoric_. True, the
cases are not really parallel. Whatever preexistent material may have
served to build up the Homeric poems, they are at least not didactic
poems, made up of precepts largely derived from technical writers, and
refined into poetic form with mature and laborious skill. To quote the
_Georgics_, not only for personal observation of facts but for guiding
precepts, is often to quote a secondary authority in a noble dress, and
serves but for adornment. But in such a consideration there would be
nothing to discourage Roman literary men. To challenge Vergil’s authority
on a rustic subject remained the prerogative of Seneca.

                    Additional note to page 263

    Varro _de lingua Latina_ VII § 105 says _liber qui suas operas
    in servitutem pro pecunia quadam debebat dum solveret nexus
    vocatur, ut ab aere obaeratus_. This antiquarian note is of
    interest as illustrating the meaning of _operae_, and the
    former position of the debtor as a temporary slave.




AGE OF THE FLAVIAN AND ANTONINE EMPERORS


XXXIV. GENERAL INTRODUCTION.

It is not easy to find a satisfactory line of division between the
period of the Flavian emperors and that of the adoptive series that came
after them. The Plebeian Flavians had no family claim, through birth or
adoption, to a preeminent position in the Roman world, and the rise of
Vespasian to power was indeed a revolution. Henceforth, though outward
forms and machinery remained, the real control of the empire rested with
those supported directly or indirectly by the great armies. But the
sound administrative policy set going by the common sense of Vespasian
long maintained the imperial fabric in strength, and it is commonly held
that from 69 to 180 AD was the Empire’s golden age. Nevertheless its
vitality was already ebbing, and the calamities that beset it in the days
of Marcus Aurelius found it unable to renew its vigour after holding
in check its barbarian invaders. The Flavian-Antonine period must be
treated as one, and from the point of view of the present inquiry certain
significant facts must always be borne in mind. The Italian element
in the armies was becoming less and less. Military policy consisted
chiefly in defence of the frontiers, for the annexations of Trajan were
not lasting, and they exhausted strength needed for defence. It was an
ominous sign that the Roman power of assimilation was failing. Mixed
armies of imperfectly Romanized soldiery, whether as conquerors or as
settlers, could not spread Roman civilization in the same thorough way as
it had become at length established in Spain or southern Gaul. To spread
it extensively and not intensively meant a weakening of Roman grasp; and
at some points[1073] it seems as if the influx of barbarism was felt
to be a menace in time of peace, not effectively counteracted by the
peaceful penetration of Rome.

Now, if the protection of Italy by chiefly alien swords was to relieve
the imperial centre from the heavy blood-tax borne by it in the old days
of Roman expansion, surely it remained an Italian function or duty to
provide carriers[1074] of Roman civilization, that is, if border lands
were to be solidly Romanized as a moral bulwark against barbarism. But
this duty could only be performed by a healthy and vigorous Italy, and
Italy[1075] was not healthy and vigorous. Internal security left the
people free to go on in the same ways as they had now been following for
generations, and those ways, as we have seen, did not tend to the revival
of a free rural population. Country towns were not as yet in manifest
decay, but there were now no imperial politics, and municipal politics,
ever petty and self-regarding, offered no stimulus to arouse a larger
and common interest. Municipalities looked for benefactors, and were
still able to find them. In this period we meet with institutions of a
charitable kind, some even promoted by the imperial government, for the
benefit of orphans and children of the poor. This was a credit to the
humanity of the age, but surely a palliative of social ailments, not a
proof of sound condition. In Rome there was life, but it was cosmopolitan
life. Rome was the capital of the Roman world, not of Italy. In the
eyes of jealous patriots it seemed that what Rome herself needed was a
thorough Romanizing. It was not from the great wicked city, thronged with
adventurers[1076] of every sort, largely Oriental Greeks, and hordes
of freedmen, that the better Roman influences could spread abroad. Nor
were the old Provinces, such as Spain and southern Gaul, where Roman
civilization had long been supreme, in a position to assimilate[1077]
and Romanize the ruder border-lands by the Rhine and Danube. They had no
energies to spare: moreover, they too depended on the central government,
and the seat of that government was Rome.

Italy alone could have vitalized the empire by moral influence, creating
in the vast fabric a spiritual unity, and making a great machine into
something more or less like a nation,—that is, if she had been qualified
for acting such a part. But Italy had never been a nation herself. The
result of the great Italian war of 90 and 89 BC had been to merge Italy
in Rome, not Rome in Italy. Italians, now Romans, henceforth shared
the exploitation of the subject countries and the hatred of oppressed
peoples. But under the constitution of the Republic politics became more
of a farce the more the franchise was extended, and the most obvious
effect of Italian enfranchisement was to increase the number of those
who directly or indirectly made a living out of provincial wrongs. The
Provinces swarmed with bloodsuckers of every kind. The establishment
of the Empire at length did something to relieve the sufferings of the
Provinces. But it was found necessary to recognize Italy as a privileged
imperial land. In modern times such privilege would take the form of
political rights and responsibilities. But political life was dead, and
privilege could only mean local liberties, exemption from burdens, and
the like. And in the long run the maintenance or abolition of privilege
would have to depend on the success or failure of the system. Now the
emperors of the first two centuries of the Empire did their best to
maintain the privileged position of Italy. But even in the time of
Augustus it was already becoming clear that Romanized Italy depended on
Rome and that Rome, so far as the Senate and Magistrates were concerned,
could not provide for the efficient administration of Italy or even of
Rome itself. Then began the long gradual process by which Italy, like
the rest of the empire, passed more and more under the control of the
imperial machine. In the period we are now considering this was steadily
going on, for brief reactions, such as that under Nerva, did not really
check it, and Italy was well on the way to become no more than a Province.

The feature of this period most important in connexion with the present
inquiry is the evidence[1078] that emperors were as a rule painfully
conscious of Italian decay. Alive to the dangers involved in its
continuance, they accepted the responsibility of doing what they could
to arrest it. Their efforts took various forms, chiefly (_a_) the direct
encouragement of farming (_b_) relief of poverty (_c_) measures for
providing more rural population or preventing emigration of that still
existing. It is evident that the aim was to place and keep more free
rustics on the land. In the numerous allotments of land to discharged
soldiers a number of odd pieces[1079] (_subsiciva_), not included in
the lots assigned, were left over, and had been occupied by squatters.
Vespasian, rigidly economical in the face of threatened state-bankruptcy,
had the titles inquired into, and resumed and sold those pieces where
no valid grant could be shewn. Either this was not fully carried out,
or some squatters must have been allowed to hold on as ‘possessors,’
probably paying a quit-rent to the treasury. For Domitian[1080] found
some such people still in occupation and converted their tenure into
proprietorship, on the ground that long possession had established a
prescriptive right. Nerva tried to go further[1081] by buying land and
planting agricultural colonies: but little or nothing was really effected
in his brief reign. In relief of poverty it was a notable extension to
look beyond the city of Rome, where corn-doles had long existed, and
continued to exist. The plan adopted was for the state to advance money
at low rates of interest to landowners in municipal areas, and to let
the interest received form a permanent endowment for the benefit of
poor parents and orphans. We must remember that to have children born
did not imply a legal obligation to rear them, and that the prospect
of help from such funds was a distinct encouragement to do so. Whether
any great results were achieved by this form of charity must remain
doubtful: flattering assurances[1082] to Trajan on the point can no more
be accepted without reserve than those addressed to Augustus on the
success of his reforms, or to Domitian on his promotion of morality. But
it seems certain that private charity was stimulated by imperial action,
and that the total sums applied in this manner were very large. Begun by
Nerva, carried out[1083] by Trajan, extended by Hadrian and Antoninus
Pius, the control of these endowments was more centralized by Marcus. In
his time great dearth in Italy had made distress more acute, and the hour
was at hand when the inner disorders of the empire would cause all such
permanent foundations to fail and disappear. They may well have relieved
many individual cases of indigence, but we can hardly suppose their
general effect on the Italian population to have been a healthy one.
They must have tended to deaden enterprise and relax self-help, for they
were too much after the pauperizing model long established in Rome. The
provision of cheap loan-capital for landowners may or may not have been a
boon in the long run.

The increase of rustic population through excess of births over deaths
could not be realized in a day, even if the measures taken to promote
it were successful. So we find Trajan[1084] not only founding colonies
in Italy but forbidding colonists to be drawn from Italy for settlement
in the Provinces; a restriction said to have been[1085] disregarded by
Marcus. But one important sequel of the frontier wars of Marcus, in which
German mercenaries were employed, was the transplanting[1086] of large
numbers of German captives into Italy. Such removals had occurred before,
but seldom and on a small scale. This wholesale transplantation under
Marcus made a precedent for many similar movements later on. It may be
taken for granted that the emperor did not turn out Italians in order to
find room for the new settlers. It is also probable that these were bound
to military service. The great military colonies of later date, formed
of whole tribes or nations settled near the frontiers, certainly held
their lands on military tenure. Such was the system of frontier defence
gradually forced upon Rome through the failure of native imperial forces
sufficient for the purpose: and this failure was first conspicuous in
Italy. Among the various measures taken by emperors to interest more
persons in promoting Italian agriculture we may notice Trajan’s[1087]
ordinance, that Provincials who aspired to become Roman Senators must
shew themselves true children of Rome by investing one third of their
property in Italian land. The order seems to have been operative, but the
reduction[1088] of the fixed minimum proportion from ⅓ to ¼ by Marcus
looks as if the first rule had been found too onerous. There is no reason
to think that the state of rural Italy was materially bettered by these
well-meant efforts. And the introduction of barbarian settlers, who had
to be kept bound to the soil in order to be readily available when needed
for military service, tended to give the rustic population a more and
more stationary character. It was in fact becoming more usual to let
farms to free _coloni_; but the _coloni_, though personally free, were
losing freedom of movement.

                  NOTE ON EMIGRATION FROM ITALY.

    In the _Journal of Roman Studies_ (vol VIII) I have discussed
    the question whether the emigration from Italy to the Provinces
    was to a serious extent agricultural in character, and in
    particular whether we can believe it to have carried abroad
    real working rustics in large numbers. Are we to see in it
    an important effective cause of the falling-off of the free
    rustic population of Italy? That the volume of emigration
    was large may be freely granted; also that settlements of
    discharged soldiers took place from time to time. Nor does it
    seem doubtful that many of the emigrants became possessors
    of farm-lands[1089] in the Provinces. But that such persons
    were working rustics, depending on their own labour, is by
    no means clear. And, if they were not, the fact of their
    holding land abroad does not bear directly on the decay of
    the working farmer class in Italy. That commerce and finance
    and exploitation in general were the main occupations of
    Italian[1090] emigrants, I do not think can be seriously
    doubted. And that many of them combined landholding with their
    other enterprises is probable enough.

    Professor Reid kindly reminds me that soldiers from Italy,
    whose term of service expired while they were still in a
    Province, were apt to settle down there in considerable
    numbers. The case of Carteia in Spain is well known, and that
    of Avido, also in Spain, was probably of the same nature. These
    were not regular Colonies. So too in Africa Marius seems to
    have left behind him communities of soldiers not regularly
    organized[1091] as _coloniae_. When the town of Uchi Maius
    received the title of _colonia_ from the emperor Severus, it
    called itself[1092] _colonia Mariana_, like the one founded by
    Marius in Corsica. And the same title appears in the case[1093]
    of Thibari. With these African settlements we may connect the
    law carried by Saturninus in 100 BC to provide the veterans
    of Marius with allotments of land in Africa, on the scale
    of 100 _iugera_ for each man. If this record[1094] is to be
    trusted (and the doubtful points cannot be discussed here), the
    natural inference is that farms of considerable size are meant,
    for the working of which no small amount of labour would be
    required. Nor is this surprising, for the soldiers of Marius
    were at the time masters of the situation, and not likely to
    be content with small grants. Whether the allotments proposed
    were in Africa or in Cisalpine Gaul[1095] is not quite certain.
    Marius seems to have left Africa in the winter of 105-4 BC.
    Since then he had been engaged in the war with the northern
    barbarians, and the lands recovered from the invaders were in
    question. Still, the proposal may have referred to Africa, for
    it is certain that the connexion of Marius with that Province
    was remembered[1096] long after. The important point is that
    the persons to be gratified were not civilian peasants but
    discharged veterans of the New Model army, professionalized by
    Marius himself. Neither the retired professional mercenaries of
    Greco-Macedonian armies, nor the military colonists of Sulla,
    give us reason to believe that such men would regard hard and
    monotonous labour with their own hands as a suitable reward
    for the toils and perils of their years of military service.
    Surely they looked forward to a life of comparative ease, with
    slaves to labour under their orders. If they kept their hold on
    their farms, they would become persons of some importance in
    their own provincial neighbourhood. Such were the _milites_ or
    _veterani_ whom we find often mentioned under the later Empire:
    and these too were evidently not labourers but landlords and
    directors.

    Therefore I hold that the class of men, many of them Italians
    by descent, whom we find holding land in various Provinces
    and living on the profits of the same, were mostly if not all
    either soldier-settlers or persons to whom landholding was one
    of several enterprises of exploitation. That the mere Italian
    peasant emigrated in such numbers as seriously to promote the
    falling-off of the free rustic population of Italy, is a thesis
    that I cannot consider as proved or probable.


XXXV. MUSONIUS.

In earlier chapters I have found it necessary to examine the views of
philosophers on the subject of agriculture and agricultural labour,
holding it important to note the attitude of great thinkers towards
these matters. And indeed a good deal is to be gleaned from Plato and
Aristotle. Free speculations on the nature of the State included not
only strictly political inquiries, but social and economic also. But in
the Macedonian period, when Greek states no longer enjoyed unrestricted
freedom of movement and policy, a change came over philosophy. The
tendency of the schools that now shewed most vital energy, such as the
Epicurean and Stoic, was to concern themselves with the Individual
rather than the State. The nature of Man, and his possibilities of
happiness, became more and more engrossing topics. As the political
conditions under which men had to live were now manifestly imposed
by circumstances over which the ordinary citizen had no control, the
happiness of the Individual could no longer be dependent on success in
political ambitions and the free play of civic life. It had to be sought
in himself, independent of circumstances. The result was that bold
questioning and the search for truth ceased to be the prime function
of philosophic schools, and the formation of character took the first
place. Hence the elaboration of systems meant to regulate a man’s life
by implanting in him a fixed conception of the world in which he had
to live, and his relation to the great universe of which he and his
immediate surroundings formed a part. And this implied a movement which
may be roughly described as from questioning to dogma. The teacher became
more of a preacher, his disciples more of a congregation of the faithful;
and more and more the efficiency of his ministrations came to depend on
his own personal influence, which we often call magnetism.

When Greek literature and thought became firmly established in Rome
during the second century BC, it was just this dogmatic treatment
of moral questions that gave philosophy a hold on a people far more
interested in conduct than in speculation. The Roman attempts, often
clumsy enough, to translate principle into practice were, and continued
to be, various in spirit and success. Stoicism in particular blended
most readily with the harder and more virile types of Roman character,
and found a peculiarly sympathetic reception among eminent lawyers. The
reigns of the first emperors were not favourable to moral philosophy;
but the accession of Nero set literature, and with it moralizing, in
motion once more. A kind of eclectic Stoicism came into fashion, a
Roman product, of which Seneca was the chief representative. A touch
of timeserving was needed to adapt Greek theories for practical use in
the world of imperial Rome. Seneca was both a courtier and a wealthy
landowner, and was one of the victims of Nero’s tyranny. We have seen
that while preaching Stoic doctrine, for instance on the relations of
master and slave, he shews little interest in agriculture for its own
sake or in the conditions of agricultural labour. It is interesting
to contrast with his attitude that of another Stoic, a man of more
uncompromising and consistent type, whose life was partly contemporaneous
with that of Seneca, and who wrote only a few years later under the
Flavian emperors.

=Musonius[1097] Rufus=, already a teacher of repute in Nero’s time,
seems to have kept himself clear of conspiracies and intrigues,
recognizing the necessity of the monarchy and devoting himself to his
profession of moral guide to young men. But any great reputation was
dangerous in Nero’s later years, and a pretext was found for banishing
the philosopher in 65. Under Galba he returned to Rome, still convinced
of the efficacy of moral suasion, witnessed the bloody successions of
emperors in 69, and risked his life in an ill-timed effort to stay the
advance of Vespasian’s soldiery by discoursing on the blessings of peace.
Vespasian seems to have allowed him to remain in Rome, and he is said to
have been tutor to Titus. Yet he had not shrunk from bringing to justice
an informer guilty of the judicial murder of a brother Stoic, and he was
generally regarded as the noblest of Roman teachers, both in principles
and in practice. He has been spoken of as a forerunner of Epictetus and
Marcus Aurelius. Evidently no timeserver, he seems to have made allowance
for human needs and human weakness in the application of strict moral
rules. It is a great pity that we have no complete authentic works of
his surviving: but some of the reports by a pupil or pupils have come
down to us. One of these extracts[1098] is so complete in itself, and so
striking in its view of agriculture and agricultural labour, that I have
translated it here. We are to bear in mind that the opinions expressed
in it belong to a time when a small number of great landlords owned a
large part (and that the most attractive) of Italy, and vast estates
in the provinces as well. It is the luxurious and slave-ridden world
of Petronius and Seneca that we must keep before us in considering the
advice of Musonius; advice which we cannot simply ignore, however much we
may see in this good man a voice crying in the wilderness.

‘There is also another resource[1099], nowise inferior to the above, one
that might reasonably be deemed superior to it, at least for a man of
strong body: I mean that derived from the land, whether the farmer owns
it or not. For we see that there are many who, though cultivating land
owned by the state[1100] or by other persons, are yet able to support
not only themselves but wives and children; while there are some who by
the devoted industry of their own hands[1101] attain to great abundance
in this way of life. For the earth responds most fairly and justly to
the care bestowed upon her, returning manifold what she receives and
providing a plenty of all things necessary to life for him that will
labour; and she does it consistently with a man’s self-respect and
dignity. For nobody, other than an effeminate weakling, would describe
any of the operations of husbandry as disgraceful or incompatible with
manly excellence. Are not planting ploughing vine-dressing honourable
works? And sowing reaping threshing, are not these all liberal pursuits,
suited to good men? Nay, the shepherd’s life, if it did not degrade
Hesiod or hinder him from winning divine favour and poetic renown,
neither will it hinder others. For my part, I hold this to be the best
of all the tasks comprised in husbandry, inasmuch as it affords the
soul more leisure for pondering and investigating what concerns mental
culture. For all tasks that bend the body and keep it fully on the strain
do at the same time force the soul to give them its whole attention, or
nearly so, sharing as it does the strain of the body: but all those that
permit the body to escape excessive strain do not prevent the soul from
reasoning out important questions and from improving its own wisdom by
such reasonings, a result which is the special aim of every philosopher.
This is why I set such special value on the art of shepherds. If however
a man does[1102] combine tillage with philosophy, I hold no other life
comparable with this, and no other means of livelihood preferable to
it. Surely it is more according to nature to get your sustenance from
Earth, our nurse and mother, than from some other source. Surely it
is more manly[1103] to live on a farm than to sit idle in a city.
Surely out-of-door pursuits are healthier than sheltered retirement.
Which, pray, is the freeman’s choice, to meet his needs by receiving
from others, or by contrivance of his own? Why, it is thought far more
dignified to be able to satisfy your own requirements unaided than with
aid of others. So true is it that to live by husbandry, of course with
due respect[1104] to what is good and honourable, is beautiful and
conducive to happiness and divine favour. Hence it was that the god
(Delphic Apollo) proclaimed[1105] that Myson of Chenae was a wise man
and greeted Aglaus of Psophis as a happy one; for these both led rustic
lives, working with their own hands and not spending their time in
cities. Surely then it is a worthy ambition to follow these men’s example
and devote ourselves to husbandry in earnest.

‘Some may think it a monstrous notion that a man of educative power,
qualified to lead youths on to philosophy, should till the soil and do
bodily labour like a rustic. And, if it had been the fact that tilling
the soil hinders the pursuit of philosophy or the lending help to others
in that pursuit, the notion would have been monstrous indeed. But, as
things are, if young men could see their teacher at work in the country,
demonstrating in practice the principle to which reason guides us, namely
that bodily toil and suffering are preferable to dependence on others
for our food, I think it would be more helpful to them than attendance
at his lectures in town. What is to hinder the pupil, while he works
at his teacher’s side, from catching his utterances on self-control or
justice or fortitude? For the right pursuit of philosophy is not promoted
by much talking, and young men are under no necessity to learn off the
mass of speculation on these topics, an accomplishment of which the
Professors[1106] are so vain. For such discourses are indeed sufficient
to use up a man’s lifetime: but it is possible to pick up the most
indispensable and useful points even when one is engaged in the work
of husbandry, especially as the work will not be unceasing but admits
periods of rest. Now I am well aware that few will be willing to receive
instruction by this method: but it is better that the majority of youths
who profess the pursuit of philosophy should never attend a philosopher
at all, I mean those unsound effeminate creatures whose presence at
the classes is a stain upon the name of philosophy. For of those that
have a genuine love of philosophy not one would be unwilling to spend
his time with a good man on a farm, aye though that farm were one most
difficult[1107] to work; seeing that he would reap great advantages
from this employment. He would have the company of his teacher night
and day; he would be removed from the evils of city life, which are a
stumbling-block to the pursuit of philosophy; his conduct, good or bad,
could not escape notice (and nothing benefits a pupil more than this);
moreover, to be under the eye of a good man when eating and drinking and
sleeping is a great benefit.’

At this point the writer digresses for a moment to quote some lines of
Theognis and to interpret them in a sense favourable to his own views.
He then continues ‘And let no one say that husbandry is a hindrance to
learning or teaching. Surely it is not so, if we reflect that under these
conditions the pupil enjoys most fully the company of his teacher while
the teacher has the fullest control of his pupil. Such then being the
state of the case, it is clear that of the philosopher’s resources none
is more useful or more becoming than that drawn from husbandry.’

In this extract three points simply stand for principles dear to all
sincere Stoics; (1) the duty and benefit of living ‘according to
Nature,’ (2) the duty and benefit of self-sufficiency and not depending
on the support of others, (3) the duty and satisfaction of continued
self-improvement. Consistent practice on these lines would go far to
produce the Stoic ideal, the Wise Man, happy and perfect in his assurance
and dignity. But the attempt to combine all these in a ‘back to the land’
scheme of moral betterment has surely in it a marked personal note. It is
the dream of a singular man in the surroundings of a rotten civilization;
a civilization more rotten, and a dream more utopian, than the dreamer
could possibly know. Aspirations towards a healthy outdoor life had been
felt by many before Musonius. Admiration of rustic pursuits was no new
thing, but it was generally freedom from worries, with the occasional
diversions of the chase, that were attractive to the town-bred man.
Ploughing and digging, and the responsible charge of flocks and herds,
had long been almost entirely left to slaves, and Musonius is driven to
confess that few youths of the class from which he drew pupils would
be willing to undertake such occupations. It was useless to urge that
bodily labour is not degrading: that it is exhausting, and engrosses the
whole attention, he could not deny. He falls back on pastoral duties as
light and allowing leisure for serious discourse. The suggestion seems
unreal, though sincere, when we remember that Italian shepherds had to
fight wolves and brigands. Moreover, the preference of grazing to tillage
was in no small degree due to the fewer persons employed in it, and the
stockmen were a notoriously rough class. Even the idealized shepherds
of the bucolic poets exhibit a coarseness not congenial to conversation
savouring of virtue. But to a Stoic preacher who could try to pacify a
licentious soldiery the notion of using pastoral pursuits as a means to
moral excellence may well have seemed a reasonable proposal.

It is at least clear that the futility of philosophy as administered
by lecturers in Rome had made a strong impression on Musonius. The
fashionable company to whom the discourses were addressed, whether they
for the moment shed some of their self-satisfaction or not, were seldom
or never induced to remodel their worthless lives. So Musonius urges them
to break away from solemn trifling and take to rustic labour. He probably
chose this remedy as one specially Roman, following the tradition of
the heroes of ancient Rome. But no artificial revival of this kind was
possible, whatever his generous optimism might say. His contemporary the
elder Pliny, who was content to glorify the vanished past and deplore
the present, had a truer appreciation of the facts. Farm-work as a
means of bringing personal influence to bear, treating body and mind
together, a sort of ‘Wisdom while you dig,’ was in such a society a
merely fantastic proposal. The importance of farming and food-production
was a commonplace, but the vocation of Musonius was moralizing and
character-production. There is no reason to think that he had any
practical knowledge of agriculture. His austere life proves nothing of
the kind. The only remark that shews acquaintance with conditions of
landholding is his reference to the farmers who make a living on hired
land. And this is in too general terms to have any historical value.


XXXVI. PLINY THE ELDER.

Among the writers of this period who refer to agricultural matters the
most important is the =elder Pliny=, who contrived in a life of public
service[1108] in various departments to amass a prodigious quantity of
miscellaneous learning and to write many erudite works. His _naturalis
historia_, an extraordinary compilation of encyclopaedic scope, contains
numerous references to agriculture, particularly in the eighteenth book.
He collected and repeated the gleanings from his omnivorous reading,
and the result is more remarkable for variety and bulk than for choice
and digestion. As a recorder he is helpful, preserving as he does a
vast number of details, some not otherwise preserved, others of use in
checking or supplementing other versions. Far removed as the book is
from being a smooth and readable literary work, the moralizing rhetoric
of the age shews its influence not only in the constant effort to wring
a lesson of some kind out of the topic of the moment, but in the longer
sermonizing passages that lead up to some subject on which the writer
feels deeply. One of these[1109] occurs in introducing agriculture,
and in pursuing the subject he loses no opportunity of contrasting a
degenerate present with a better past. We need not take his lamentations
at their full face-value, but that they were in the main justified is
not open to doubt. It has been so often necessary to cite him in earlier
chapters, that we shall not have to dwell upon him at great length here.

The functions of compiler and antiquarian are apt to coincide very
closely, and it is in his picture of the earlier conditions of Roman
and Italian farming that Pliny’s evidence is most interesting. The
old traditions[1110] of the simple and manly yeomen, each tilling his
own little plot of ground, content with his seven _iugera_ of land or
even with two in the earliest times, Cincinnatus and the rest of the
farmer-heroes, to whom their native soil, proud of her noble sons,
responded[1111] with a bounteous fertility that she denies to the
heartless labour of slave-gangs on modern _latifundia_,—these are the
topics on which he enlarges with a rhetorical or even poetic warmth.
The ruin of Italy, nay of Provinces too, through the land-grabbing and
formation of vast estates, is denounced[1112] in a classic passage. He
sees no end to the process. Six landlords held between them half the
Province of Africa in the time of Nero. Wanting money, the emperor put
them to death for the sake of their property. He does not add, but
doubtless reflected, that such measures only added to the resources
controlled by a tyrant ruler, not a desirable object. We may add further
that such iniquities inevitably disposed virtuous emperors to leave the
land-monopolizers a free hand, perhaps unwillingly; but these gentry
were not breaking the law by buying land, and an emperor conscious
of the burden of administration, and desiring to carry on his work
undisturbed by internal disloyalty, had strong reasons for not provoking
wealthy capitalists. To conciliate them, and if possible to engage their
cooperation in schemes designed for the public good according to the
ideas of the time, was to proceed on the line of least resistance.

Among the traditional precepts handed on by Pliny from Cato and
others are many with which we are already familiar. Such is the rule
of Regulus[1113], that in buying a farm regard must be had to the
healthiness of the situation as well as to the richness of the soil.
Another is the need of keeping a due proportion[1114] between farm-house
and farm. Great men of the late Republic, Lucullus and Scaevola, erred
on this point in opposite directions: Marius on the other hand laid out
a _villa_ so skilfully that Sulla said ‘here was a man at last with
eyes in his head.’ The value of the master’s eye is another old friend.
We have also seen above that Mago’s[1115] advice, when you buy a farm,
to sell your town house, was not a policy to be followed by Romans of
quality, who felt it a duty not to cut themselves off from touch with
public affairs. Another tradition is that of the sentiment of the olden
time, holding it criminal[1116] to slay man’s fellow-worker, the ox. In
referring to the technical skill required in a steward, a favourite topic
of Cato, Pliny gives his own view[1117] briefly, ‘the master ought to set
the greatest store by his steward, but the fellow should not be aware of
it.’ The calculation of labour-cost[1118] in terms of _operae_, as with
others, so with him, is a regular way of reckoning. And we meet once more
the saying that, while good cultivation is necessary, too high farming
does not pay. He illustrates this by an instance[1119] of comparatively
modern date. A man of very humble origin, who rose through military
merit to the consulship, was rewarded by Augustus with a large sum of
money: this he spent on buying land[1120] in Picenum and fancy-farming.
In this course he ran through his property, and his heir did not think
it worth his while to claim the succession. The general tendency of all
these precepts and anecdotes is to commend moderation and to rebuke the
foolish ambition of land-proud capitalists of his own day. His praise of
the ancient ways and regret for their disappearance do not suggest any
hope of their revival. To Pliny as to others it was only too clear that
legends of conquering consuls setting their own hands to the plough had
no practical bearing on the conditions of the present age.

Thoughtful men[1121] could not ignore the fact that the decline in
production of cereal crops left Italy exposed to risk of famine. At any
moment storms might wreck the corn-fleets from Egypt or Africa, and the
strategic value of Egypt[1122] as a vital food-centre had been shewn
quite recently in strengthening the cause of Vespasian. No wonder Pliny
is uneasy, and looks back regretfully[1123] to the time when Italy was
not fed by the Provinces, when thrifty citizens grew their own staple
food-stuffs, and corn was plentiful and cheap. He quotes some prices from
the time of the great Punic wars and earlier, which shew the remarkable
cheapness of wine oil dried figs and flesh, as well as of various
grains. This result was not due to great estates owned by individual
landlords[1124] who elbowed out their neighbours, but to the willing work
of noble citizens tilling their little holdings. To look for similar
returns from the task-work of chained and branded slaves is a sheer libel
on Mother Earth. That he treats at great length of agricultural details,
not only of grain-crops in their various kinds, but fruits, vegetables,
indeed everything he can think of, and all the processes of cultivation,
is due to his encyclopaedic bent, and need not detain us here. When he
tells us[1125] that vine-growing was a comparatively late development
among the Romans, who long were content with grain-growing, it is a
passing sigh over a vanished age of simple life. The meaning of words
changes and records the change of things. When the Twelve Tables[1126]
spoke of _hortus_, it was not a garden in the modern sense, a place of
pleasure and luxury, that was meant, but a poor man’s small holding. By
that venerable code it was made a criminal offence[1127] to cut or graze
off under cover of night the crops raised on a man’s plough-land. A man
whose farm was badly cultivated was disgraced by the censors. For, as
Cato[1128] said, there is no life like the farmer’s for breeding sturdy
men to make efficient soldiers and loyal citizens. The gist of these
utterances, picked out of the mass, is that Pliny would like to see Italy
able to provide for her own feeding and her own defence, but knows very
well that no such ideal is within the range of hope.

His interest in agriculture such as he saw it around him is shewn in
recording recent or contemporary doings, such as that of the man
mentioned above who squandered a fortune on ill-judged farming. A more
successful venture[1129] was that of Remmius Palaemon, apparently in the
time of Claudius. He was a freedman, not a farmer, but a school-master
(_grammaticus_) of repute, a vainglorious fellow. He bought some land,
not of the best quality and let down by bad farming. To farm this he
engaged another freedman, one Acilius Sthenelus, who had the vineyards
thoroughly overhauled (_pastinatis de integro_). Before eight years
were out, he was able to sell a hanging crop for half as much again as
it had cost him to buy the land, and within ten years he sold the land
itself to Seneca (not a man for fancy prices) for four times as much as
he had given for it. Truly a fine speculation. Sthenelus had carried out
another of the same kind[1130] on his own account. We must note that both
were in the vine-culture, not in corn-growing, and the appearance of
freedmen, probably oriental Greeks, as leaders of agricultural enterprise
in Italy. There is nothing to shew that these undertakings were on a
large scale: the land in Sthenelus’ own case is stated as not more than
60 _iugera_. But no doubt he was, like many of his tribe, a keen man of
business[1131] and not too proud or preoccupied to give close attention
to the matter in hand. Such a man would get the utmost out of his slaves
and check waste: he would keep a tight grip on a slave steward if (which
we are not told) he found it necessary to employ one at all. For Pliny,
as for most Romans, a profitable speculation had great charms. He cannot
resist repeating the old Greek story[1132] of the sage who demonstrated
his practical wisdom by making a ‘corner’ in olive-presses, foreseeing a
‘bumper’ crop. Only he turns it round, making it a ‘corner’ in oil, in
view of a poor crop and high prices, and tells it not of Thales but of
Democritus.

There were of course many principles of agriculture that no economic
or social changes could affect. The ‘oracle’ of Cato, as to the
importance[1133] of thorough and repeated ploughing followed by liberal
manuring, was true under all conditions. But just for a moment the veil
is lifted to remind us that in the upland districts there was still an
Italy agriculturally, as socially, very different from the lowland arable
of which we generally think when speaking of Italian farming. ‘Ploughing
on hillsides[1134] is cross-wise, and so toilsome to man that he even
has to do ox-team’s work: at least the mountain peoples[1135] use the
mattock for tillage instead of the plough, and do without the ox.’ It
is to be regretted that we have so little evidence as to the condition
of the dalesmen, other than the passages of such writers as Horace and
Juvenal, who refer to them as rustic folk a sojourn among whom is a
refreshing experience after the noise and bustle of Rome. For it seems
certain that in these upland retreats there survived whatever was left of
genuine Italian life, and we should like to be able to form some notion
of its quantity; that is, whether the population of freemen on small
holdings, living mostly on the produce of their own land, was numerically
an important element in the total population of Italy. That great
stretches of hill-forest were in regular use simply as summer pastures,
and that the bulk of the arable lands were held in great estates, and
slaves employed in both departments, we hear in wearisome iteration. But
to get a true picture of the country as a whole is, in the absence of
statistics, not possible.

I have not been able to discover in Pliny any definite repugnance
to slavery as a system. It is true that he is alive to the evils of
the domestic slavery prevalent in his day. The brigades of slaves
(_mancipiorum legiones_)[1136] filling the mansions of the rich,
pilfering at every turn, so that nothing is safe unless put under lock
and seal, are a nuisance and a demoralizing influence. They are an alien
throng (_turba externa_) in a Roman household; a sad contrast[1137] to
the olden time, when each family had its one slave, attached to his
master’s clan, when the whole household lived in common, and nothing had
to be locked up. But this is only one of Pliny’s moralizing outbreaks,
and it is the abuse and overgrowth of slavery, not slavery in itself,
that he is denouncing. In speaking of agriculture he says ‘to have
farms cultivated by slave-gangs[1138] is a most evil thing, as indeed
are all acts performed by those who have no hope.’ Here the comparative
inefficiency of workers who see no prospect of bettering their condition
is plainly recognized; but it is the economic defect, not the outrage
on a common humanity, that inspires the consciously futile protest. And
at the very end of his great book, when he breaks out into a farewell
panegyric[1139] on Italy, and enumerates the various elements of her
preeminence among the countries of the world, he includes the supply of
slave-labour[1140] in the list. Spain perhaps comes next, but here too
the organized employment[1141] of slaves is one of the facts that are
adduced to justify her praise. Now I do not imagine that Pliny was a
hard unkindly man. But he evidently accepted slavery as an established
institution, one of the economic bases of society. He saw its
inferiority to free labour, but a passing protest seemed to him enough.
Had he been asked, Why don’t you recommend free labour directly? I think
he would have answered, Where are you going to find it in any quantity?
And it is obvious that, slave labour once assumed, the great thing was
to have enough of it. Nor again have I found him using _colonus_ in
the sense of tenant farmer. In that of ‘cultivator’ it occurs several
times, as in the quotation[1142] from Cato, that to call a man _bonum
colonum_ was of old the height of praise. Figuratively it appears in
comparisons, as when the guilt of the slayer of an ox is emphasized[1143]
by the addition ‘as if he had made away with his _colonus_.’ So of the
fertilizing Nile he says ‘discharging the duty[1144] of a _colonus_.’ In
the passage where he warns his readers against too high farming[1145] he
remarks ‘There are some crops that it does not pay to gather, unless the
owner is employing his own children or a _colonus_ of his own or hands
that have on other grounds to be fed—I mean, if you balance the cost
against the gain.’ Here it is just possible that he means ‘a tenant of
his own,’ that is a tenant long attached to the estate, like the _coloni
indigenae_ of Columella: but I think it is quite neutral, and probably
he has in mind either a relative or a slave. The ‘persons for whose keep
he is responsible’ sums up to the effect that if you have mouths to
fill you may as well use their labour, for it will add nothing to your
labour-bill. So far as I have seen, the difference between ownership and
tenancy is not a point of interest to Pliny.

In continuation of what has been said above as to the relations of Vergil
and Columella, it is necessary to discuss briefly the attitude of Pliny
towards these two writers. The indices to the _Natural History_ at once
disclose the fact that citations of Vergil[1146] are about six times as
numerous as those of Columella. Indeed he seldom refers to the latter;
very often to Varro, even more often to Cato. The frequent references
to Vergil may reasonably be explained as arising from a wish to claim
whenever possible the moral support of the now recognized chief figure
of Roman literature. This was all the more easy, inasmuch as Vergil’s
precepts in the _Georgics_[1147] are mostly old or borrowed doctrine
cast into a perfect form. Columella had used them in a like spirit, but
in dealing with the labour-question he faced facts, not only instructing
his readers in the technical processes of agriculture, but setting forth
the forms of labour-organization by which those processes were to be
carried on. Now Pliny records an immense mass of technical detail, but
of labour-organization he says hardly any thing; for his laments over a
vanished past are only of use in relieving his own feelings. And yet the
labour-question, and the tenancy-question connected therewith, were the
central issues of the agricultural problem. It was not the knowledge of
technical details that was conspicuously lacking, but the will and means
to apply knowledge already copious. Not what to do, but how to get it
done, was the question which Columella tried to answer and Pliny, like
Vergil, did not really face. It is curious to turn out the eight distinct
references to Columella in Pliny. In none of these passages is there a
single word of approval, and the general tone of them is indifferent and
grudging. Sometimes the words seem to suggest that his authority is not
of much weight, or pointedly remark that it stands quite alone. In one
place[1148] he is flatly accused of ignorance. When we consider that
Pliny speaks of Varro with high respect, and positively worships Cato and
Vergil, it is clear that there must have been some special reason for
this unfriendly and half-contemptuous attitude. The work of Columella
did not deserve such treatment. It evidently held its ground in spite of
sneers, for Palladius in the fourth century cites it repeatedly as one
of the leading authorities. It is not difficult to conjecture possible
causes for the attitude of Pliny: but none of those that occur to me is
sufficient, even if true, to justify it. I must leave it as one of the
weak points in the _Natural History_.


XXXVII. TACITUS.

=P Cornelius Tacitus=, one of the great figures of Roman literature,
passed through the time of the Flavian emperors, but his activity as a
writer belonged chiefly to the reign of Trajan. Like most historians,
he gave his attention to public and imperial affairs, and we get
from him very little as to the conditions of labour. Of emperors and
their doings evil or good, of the upper classes and their reactionary
sympathies, their intrigues and perils, we hear enough: but of the poor
wage-earners[1149] and slaves hardly anything, for to one who still
regretted the Republic while accepting the Empire, an aristocrat at
heart, the lower orders were of no more importance than they had been to
Cicero. Indeed they were now less worthy of notice, as free political
life had ceased and the city rabble, no longer needed for voting and
rioting, had merely to be fed and amused. A populace of some sort was a
necessary element in the imperial capital: that it was in fact a mongrel
mob could not be helped, and year by year it became through manumissions
of slaves a mass of more and more cosmopolitan pauperism. The Provinces
and the frontier armies were matters of deep interest, but the wars of
the succession after Nero only served to exhibit with irresistible stress
the comparative unimportance of Italy. Tacitus, a Roman of good family,
born in Italy if not in Rome, dignified and critical by temperament, was
not the man to follow the fashion of idle and showy rhetoric. He does not
waste time and effort in vainly deploring the loss of a state of things
that could not be restored. That the present condition of Italy grieved
him, we may feel sure. But he viewed all things in a spirit of lofty
resignation. That he was led to contrast the real or assumed virtues of
German barbarians with the flagrant vices of Roman life was about the
limit of his condescension to be a preacher: and it is not necessary to
assume that the pointing of a moral was the sole motive of his tract on
the land and tribes of Germany.

I have already referred to the uneasiness of Tiberius as to the
food-supply[1150] of Rome, dependent on importations of corn which were
liable to be interrupted by foul weather and losses at sea. The risk was
real enough, and the great artificial harbours constructed at the Tiber
mouth by Claudius and Trajan were chiefly meant to provide accommodation
for corn-fleets close at hand, with large granaries to store
cargoes[1151] in reserve. The slave rising of 24 AD in south-eastern
Italy, and its suppression, have also been mentioned[1152] above.
These passages, and a passing reference to the unproductiveness[1153]
of the soil (of Italy) are significant of the inefficiency of Italian
agriculture in the time of Tiberius. But in reporting these matters
Tacitus writes as historian, not as a contemporary witness, and enough
has been said of them above. A curious passage, not yet referred to, is
that describing the campaign[1154] against money-lenders in 33 AD. A
law passed by Julius Caesar in BC 49 with the object of relieving the
financial crisis without resorting to a general cancelling of debts,
long obsolete, was raked up again, and there was widespread alarm, for
most senators had money out on loan. It seems that some trials and
condemnations actually took place, and that estates of the guilty were
actually seized and sold for cash under the provisions of a disused
law. Further trouble at once followed, for there was a general calling
in of mortgages, while cash was scarce, the proceeds of the late sales
having passed into one or other of the state treasuries. Eighteen months
grace had been granted to enable offending capitalists to arrange their
affairs in conformity with the law. Evidently these gentry were in no
hurry to reinvest their money as it came in, but waited for a fall in
the price of land, certain to occur as a consequence of dearer money.
In order to guard against such a result, the Senate had ordered that
each (that is, each paid-off creditor,) should invest ⅔ of his loanable
capital in Italian real estate, and that each debtor[1155] should repay
⅔ of his debt at once. But the creditors were demanding payment in full,
and it did not look well for the debtors to weaken their own credit
(by practically confessing insolvency). So there was great excitement,
followed by uproar in the praetor’s court: and the measures intended
to relieve the crisis—the arrangements for sale and purchase—had just
the opposite effect. For the capitalists had locked up all their money
with a view to the (eventual) purchase of land. The quantity of land
thrown on the market sent prices down, and the more encumbered a man was
the more difficult he found it to dispose of his land (that is, at a
price that would clear him of debt). Numbers of people were ruined, and
the situation was only saved by Tiberius, who advanced a great sum of
money to be used in loans for three years free of interest, secured in
each case on real estate[1156] of twice the value. Thus confidence was
restored and private credit gradually revived. But, Tacitus adds, the
purchase of land on the lines of the Senate’s order was never carried
through: in such matters it is the way of the world to begin with zeal
and end with indifference.

If I have rightly given the sense of this passage, it furnishes some
points of interest. It sets before us a state of things in which a
number of landowners have raised money by mortgaging their real estate,
disregarding the provisions (whatever they were) of a law practically
disused. This reminds us that one very general use of Italian land was as
a security on which money could at need be raised. It was the only real
security always available, and this inclined people to keep their hold on
it, though as a direct income-producer it seldom gave good returns. No
doubt they had to pay on their borrowings a higher rate[1157] of interest
than they got on their capital invested in land. To be forced suddenly
to sell their lands in a glutted market was manifest ruin; for the whole
strength of their position lay in the justified assumption that the
capital value of their land in the market exceeded the amount of their
mortgage debts. Otherwise, who would have lent them the money on that
security? We can hardly avoid the suspicion that the frequent use of
land as a pledge may have had something to do with that unsatisfactory
condition of agriculture on which the evidence of Latin writers has
driven us to dwell. The mortgagor, once he had got the money advanced,
had less interest in the landed security: the mortgagee, so long as he
got his good return on the money lent, was unconcerned to see that his
debtor’s income was maintained; and that, in taking a mortgage, he had
insisted on a large margin of security for his capital, is not to be
doubted. For what purpose these loans were generally contracted, we are
not told. Those who borrowed money to waste it in extravagance would
surely have found it more business-like to sell their land outright. The
number of those who preferred to keep it, though encumbered on onerous
terms, simply from social pride, cannot have been really large; but they
would hardly make wise landlords. Probably some men raised money to
employ it in speculations[1158] that seemed to offer rich returns. So
long as the empire stood strong, mercantile speculation was far-reaching
and vigorous. But those engaged in this line of business would seldom be
able to find large sums in ready cash at short notice. Hence to them,
as to spendthrifts, the sudden calling in of mortgages was a grave
inconvenience.

The picture of the wily capitalists, hoarding their money till the
‘slump’ in land-values had fully developed, is one of all ‘civilized’
peoples and ages. What is notable on this particular occasion is the
sequel according to Tacitus. Once their design of profiting by their
neighbours’ necessities was checked by the intervention of Tiberius, the
investment in real estate was no longer attractive. The Senate’s order
was not enforced and the money-lenders could, and did, reserve their
ready cash for use in some more remunerative form of investment. The
slackness of the Senate may have been partly due to careless neglect, as
the words seem to suggest. But it may be suspected that some members of
that body had private reasons for wishing the Order of the House not to
be seriously enforced. Tacitus remarks that, on the matter being laid
before the Fathers, they were thrown into a flutter, since there was
hardly one among them[1159] that had not broken the law. This surely
refers to the time-honoured trick of Roman senators, who, forbidden
to engage in commerce (and money-lending was closely connected with
commerce), evaded the restriction in various ways, such as holding
shares in companies or lending through their freedmen as agents. So now,
seeking a high rate of interest on their capital, they did not wish to
lock up any more of it in land. Most of them would already own enough
real estate for social purposes. From this episode we have some right
to infer that in the period of the early Empire it had already become
clear that very extensive landowning in Italy was an unwise policy for
men who wanted a large income. Yet the preferential position of Italy had
not ceased to be a fact; and even in the time of Trajan we have seen an
imperial ordinance bidding new senators from the Provinces to invest ⅓ of
their fortunes in Italian land. This might raise prices for the moment,
but it had nothing directly to do with promoting agriculture. Practical
farming seems to have been passing more and more into the hands of
humbler persons, often freedmen, who treated it as a serious business.

That the attention of Tacitus had been directed to the methods of
capitalists in Italy, and therewith to money-lending, landholding, and
slavery, may be gathered from the remarks on these subjects in his
_Germany_. He writes, as Herodotus and others had done before him,
taking particular notice of customs differing from those prevalent in
his own surroundings. Thus he notes[1160] the absence of money-lending
at interest. He describes the system of communal ownership of land by
village-units, and its periodic redistribution among the members of the
community. The wide stretches of open plains[1161] enable the Germans to
put fresh fields under tillage year by year, leaving the rest in fallow
(no doubt as rough pasture). Intensive culture is unknown. To wring the
utmost out of the soil by the sweat of their brow is not their aim:
they have no orchards or gardens or fenced paddocks, but are content
to raise a crop of corn. All this is in marked contrast with Italian
conditions. Even to get rid of fallows was an ambition of agriculturists
in Italy, and a rotation-system[1162] had been devised to this end. And,
whatever may have been the case in prehistoric times, full property in
land had long been established by the Roman Law, and there was in the
Italian land-system no trace of redistribution for short terms of use.
In treating of slavery, the first point made is its connexion[1163] with
the inveterate German habit of gambling. Losers will end by staking their
own freedom on a last throw; if this also fails, they will submit to be
fettered and sold. To the Roman this seems a false notion of honour. He
adds that to take advantage of this sort of slave-winning is not approved
by German sentiment: hence the winner combines[1164] scruples with profit
by selling a slave of this class into foreign lands. Other slaves are
not employed in Roman fashion as an organized staff of domestics. Each
has a lodging and home of his own: his lord requires of him a fixed
rent[1165] of so much corn or live-stock or clothing, as of a tenant: and
he renders no service beyond this. House-work is done by a man’s own wife
and family. Slaves are seldom flogged or chained or put to task-work.
The German may kill his slave, but it will not be as a penalty for
disobedience, but in a fit of rage. Freedmen are of little more account
than slaves, and are only of influence at the courts of the kings who
rule some of the tribes. There they rise above the freeborn and noble:
but in general the inferiority of freedmen serves to mark the superiority
of the freeborn.

Tacitus had held an important official post in Belgic Gaul or one of
the so-called ‘Germanies’ along the Rhine, and had been at pains to
learn all he could of the independent barbarians to the East. The Rhine
frontier was one of the Roman borders that needed most careful watching,
and Roman readers took an uneasy interest in the doings of the warrior
tribes whose numbers, in contrast to their own falling birth-rate, were
ever renewed and increased by alarming fertility. He was not alone in
perceiving the contrasts between Italian and German institutions and
habits, or in reading morals therefrom, expressed or implied. Germans had
been employed as mercenary soldiers by Julius Caesar, and were destined
to become one of the chief elements of the Roman armies. But in Italy
they were perhaps more directly known as slaves. We have just seen that
Tacitus speaks of a regular selling of slaves over the German border, and
another passage[1166] incidentally illustrates this fact in a curious
manner. In the course of his conquest of Britain, Agricola established
military posts on the NW coast over against Ireland. It seems to have
been in one of these that a cohort of Usipi were stationed. They had
been raised in the Roman Germanies, and apparently sent over in a hurry.
Not liking the service, they killed their officer and the old soldiers
set to train them, seized three vessels, and put to sea. After various
adventures and sufferings in a voyage round the north of Britain, they
fell into the hands of some tribes of northern Germany, who took them for
pirates—those that were left of them. Of the fate reserved for some of
these Tacitus remarks ‘Some were sold as slaves[1167] and, passing from
purchaser to purchaser, eventually reached the Roman bank (of the Rhine),
where their extraordinary story aroused much interest.’ Such were the
strange possibilities in the northern seas and lands where the Roman and
the German met.

                  NOTE ON AN AFRICAN INSCRIPTION.

    It may be convenient to notice here an inscription[1168]
    relative to irrigation in Africa. In all parts of the empire
    subject to drought the supply of water to farmers was a matter
    of importance, as it is in most Mediterranean countries today.
    Good soils, that would otherwise have lain waste, were thus
    turned to account. In the African Provinces much was done to
    meet this need, as the remains of works for storage of water
    clearly testify. The period 69-180 AD seems to have been marked
    by a considerable extension of cultivation in these parts,
    and particularly in southern Numidia, which at that time was
    included in the Province Africa. In this district, between
    Sitifis (Setif) and Trajan’s great city Thamugadi (Timgad),
    lay the commune of Lamasba[1169], the members of which appear
    to have been mainly engaged in agriculture. There has been
    preserved a large portion of a great inscription dealing with
    the water-rights of their several farms. There is nothing to
    suggest that the holders of these plots were tenants under
    great landlords. They seem to be owners, not in the full
    sense of Roman civil law, but on the regular provincial[1170]
    footing, subject to tribute. To determine the shares of the
    several plots in the common water-supply was probably the most
    urgent problem of local politics in this community.

    The date of the inscription has been placed in the reign of
    Elagabalus; but it is obviously based on earlier conditions
    and not improbably a revision of an earlier scheme. It deals
    with the several plots one by one, fixing the number of
    hours[1171] during which the water is to be turned on to each,
    and making allowance for variation of the supply according to
    the season of the year. A remarkable feature of this elaborate
    scheme is the division of the plots into those below the water
    level into which the water finds its way by natural flow
    (_declives_), and those above water level (_acclives_). To the
    latter it is clear that the water must have been raised by
    mechanical means, and the scale of hours fixed evidently makes
    allowance for the slower delivery accomplished thereby. For
    the ‘descendent’ water was to be left flowing for fewer hours
    than the ‘ascendent.’ As a specimen of the care taken in such
    a community to prevent water-grabbing by unscrupulous members
    this record is a document of high interest. That many others of
    similar purport existed, and have only been lost to us by the
    chances of time, is perhaps no rash guess.

    The water-leet is called _aqua Claudiana_. The regulations are
    issued by the local senate and people (_decreto ordinis et
    colonorum_), for the place had a local[1172] government. Names
    of 43 possessors remain on the surviving portion of the stone.
    In form they are generally Roman[1173]. It is noted that only
    three of them have a _praenomen_. Of the quality of the men
    it is not easy to infer anything. Some may perhaps have been
    Italians. Whether they, or some of them, were working farmers
    must remain doubtful. At all events they do not seem to belong
    to the class of _coloni_ of whom we shall have to speak below,
    but to be strictly cultivating possessors. What labour they
    employed it is hardly possible to guess.


XXXVIII. FRONTINUS.

=Sextus Julius Frontinus=, a good specimen of the competent departmental
officers in the imperial service, was not only a distinguished
military commander but an engineer and a writer of some merit. His
little treatise[1174] on the aqueducts of Rome has for us points of
interest. From it we can form some notion of the importance of the great
water-works, not only to the city but to the country for some miles
in certain directions. For water-stealing by the illicit tapping of
the main channels was practised outside as well as within the walls.
Landowners[1175] did it to irrigate their gardens, and the underlings
of the staff (_aquarii_) connived at the fraud: to prevent this abuse
was one of the troubles of the _curator_. But in certain places water
was delivered by branch supplies from certain aqueducts. This of course
had to be duly licensed, and license was only granted when the flow
of water in the particular aqueduct was normally sufficient to allow
the local privilege without reducing the regular discharge in Rome.
The municipality of Tibur[1176] seems to have had an old right to a
branch of the _Anio vetus_. The _aqua Crabra_ had been a spring serving
Tusculum[1177], but in recent times the Roman _aquarii_ had led off some
of its water into the _Tepula_, and made illicit profit out of the supply
thus increased in volume. Frontinus himself with the emperor’s approval
redressed the grievance, and the full supply of the _Crabra_ again served
the Tusculan landlords. The jealous attention given to the water-works
is illustrated by the decrees[1178] of the Senate in the time of the
Republic and of emperors since, by which grants of water-rights can only
be made to individuals named in the grant, and do not pass to heirs or
assigns: the water must only be drawn from the reservoir named, and used
on the estate for which the license is specifically granted.

The office of _curator aquarum_ was manifestly no sinecure. It was
not merely that constant precautions had to be taken against the
stealing of the water. An immense staff[1179] had to be kept to their
duties, and the cleansing and repair of the channels needed prompt and
continuous attention. And it seems that some of the landowners through
whose estates the aqueducts passed gave much trouble[1180] to the
administration. Either they erected buildings in the strips of land
reserved as legal margin on each side of a channel, or they planted
trees there, thus damaging the fabric; or they drove local roads over
it; or again they blocked the access to working parties engaged in the
duties of upkeep. Frontinus quotes decrees of the Senate dealing with
these abuses and providing penalties for persons guilty of such selfish
and reckless conduct. But to legislate was one thing, to enforce the
law was another. Yet the unaccommodating[1181] landlords had no excuse
for their behaviour. It was not a question of ‘nationalizing’ the side
strips, though that would have been amply justified in the interests
of the state. But the fact is that the old practice of Republican days
was extremely tender of private rights. If a landlord made objection to
selling a part of his estate, they took over the whole block and paid
him for it. Then they marked off the portions required for the service,
and resold the remainder. Thus the state was left unchallenged owner of
the part retained for public use. But the absence of any legal or moral
claim has not availed to stop encroachments: the draining away of the
water still goes on, with or without leave, and even the channels and
pipes themselves are pierced. No wonder that more severe and detailed
legislation was found necessary in the time of Augustus. The writer ends
by recognizing the unfairness of suddenly enforcing a law the long disuse
of which has led many to presume upon continued impunity for breaking it.
He therefore has been reviving it gradually, and hopes that offenders
will not force him to execute it with rigour.

What stands out clearly in this picture of the water-service is the utter
lack of public spirit imputed to the landowners near Rome by a careful
and responsible public servant of good repute. There is none of the
sermonizing of Seneca or the sneers and lamentations of Pliny. Frontinus
takes things as they are, finds them bad, and means to do his best to
improve them, while avoiding the temptations of the new broom. That a
great quantity of water was being, and had long been, diverted from
the public aqueducts to serve suburban villas and gardens, is certain.
What we do not learn is whether much or any of this was used for the
market-gardens of the humble folk who grew[1182] garden-stuff for the
Roman market. It is the old story,—little or nothing about the poor, save
when in the form of a city rabble they achieve distinction as a public
burden and nuisance. It does however seem fairly certain that licenses
to abstract water were only granted as a matter of special favour.
Therefore, so far as licensed abstraction went, it is most probable that
influential owners of _suburbana_ were the only beneficiaries. Theft of
water with connivance[1183] of the staff was only possible for those
who could afford to bribe. There remains the alternative of taking it by
eluding or defying the vigilance of the staff. Is it probable that the
poor market-gardener ventured to do this? Not often, I fancy: we can only
guess, and I doubt whether much of the intercepted water came his way.
There was it is true one aqueduct[1184] the water of which was of poor
quality. It was a work of Augustus, intended to supply the great pond
(_naumachia_) in which sham sea-fights were held to amuse the public.
When not so employed, this water was made available for irrigation of
gardens. This was on the western or Vatican side of the Tiber. Many rich
men had pleasure-gardens in that part, and we cannot be sure that even
this water was in practice serving any economic purpose.


XXXIX. INSCRIPTIONS RELATIVE TO _ALIMENTA_.

It is impossible to leave unnoticed the inscriptions[1185] of this period
relative to _alimenta_, and Mommsen’s interpretation[1186] of the two
chief ones, though their connexion with my present subject is not very
close. In the bronze tablets recording respectively the declarations of
estate-values in the communes of Ligures Baebiani (101 AD) and Veleia
(103 AD), made with the view of ascertaining the securities upon which
the capital endowment was to be advanced, we have interesting details of
this ingenious scheme for perpetuating charity. But neither these, nor
some minor inscribed records of bequests, nor again the experience of
Pliny the younger in a benefaction[1187] of the same kind, give us direct
evidence on labour-questions. It is in connexion with tenure of land and
management of estates that these documents mainly concern us. The fact
that there was felt to be a call for charities to encourage the rearing
of children was assuredly not a sign of social or economic wellbeing; but
this I have remarked above.

The following points stand out clearly in the interpretation of Mommsen.
The growth of large estates as against small is shewn in both the
tablets as having gone far by the time of Trajan: but not so far as
modern writers have imagined. In the case of the Ligures Baebiani there
is record of a considerable number of properties of moderate value,
indeed they are in a majority. At Veleia, though small estates have not
disappeared, there are more large ones, and the process of absorption
has evidently been more active. This was not strange, for the former
case belongs to the Hirpinian hill country of southern Italy, the latter
to the slopes of the Apennine near Placentia, including some of the
rich plain of the Po. The latter would naturally attract capital more
than the former. I have more than once remarked that in the upland
districts agricultural conditions were far less revolutionized than in
the lowlands. This seems to be an instance in point: but the evidence is
not complete. There is nothing to shew that the estates named in these
tablets were the sole landed properties of their several owners. Nor is
it probable. To own estates in different parts of the country was a well
understood policy of landlords. How we are to draw conclusions as to the
prevalence of great estates from a few isolated local instances, without
a statement of the entire landed properties of the persons named, I
cannot see. That writers of the Empire, when they speak of _latifundia_,
are seldom thinking of the crude and brutal plantation-system of an
earlier time, is very true. Those vast arable farms with their huge
slave-gangs were now out of fashion, and Mommsen points out that our
records are practically silent as to large-scale arable farming. We are
not to suppose that it was extinct, but it was probably rare.

The most valuable part of this paper is its recognition of the vital
change in Italian agriculture, the transfer of farming from a basis of
ownership to one of tenancy. The yeoman or owner-cultivator of olden
time had been driven out or made a rare figure in the most eligible
parts of Italy. The great plantations, which had largely superseded the
small-scale farms, had in their turn proved economic failures. Both
these systems, in most respects strongly contrasted, had one point in
common: the land was cultivated by or for the owner, and for his own
account. But the failure of the large-scale plantation-system did not so
react as to bring back small ownership. Large ownership still remained,
supported as it was by the social importance attached to landowning, and
occasionally by governmental action directed to encourage investment in
Italian land. Large owners long struggled to keep their estates in hand
under stewards farming for their masters’ account. But this plan was
doomed to failure, because the care and attention necessary to make it
pay were in most cases greater than landlords were willing to bestow. By
Columella’s time this fact was already becoming evident. He could only
advise the landlords to be other than he found them, and meanwhile point
to an alternative, namely application of the tenancy-system. It was this
latter plan that more and more found favour. The landlord could live in
town and draw his rents, himself free to pursue his own occupations.
The tenant-farmer was only bound by the terms of his lease; and, being
resident, was able to exact the full labour of his staff and prevent
waste and robbery. The custom was for the landlord to provide[1188]
the equipment (_instrumentum_) of the farm, or at least most of it,
including slaves. Thus he was in a sense partner of his tenant, finding
most of the working capital. Whether he had a claim to a money rent only,
or to a share of crops also, depended on the terms of letting. It seems
that rents were often in arrear, and that attempts to recover sums due by
selling up tenants’ goods did not always cover the debts.

The typical tenant-farmer was certainly a ‘small man.’ To let the whole
of a large estate to a ‘big man’ with plenty of capital was not the
practice in Italy. Why? I think the main reason was that a big capitalist
who wanted to get the highest return on his money could at this time do
better for himself in other ventures: if set upon a land-enterprise, he
could find far more attractive openings in some of the Provinces. Anyhow,
as Mommsen says, ‘Grosspacht’ never became acclimatized in Italy, though
we find it on Imperial domains, for instance in Africa. In connexion with
this matter I am led to remark that small tenancy ‘Kleinpacht’ seems
to have existed in two forms, perhaps indistinguishable in law, but
different in their practical effect. When a landlord, letting parcels
of a big estate to tenants, kept in hand the chief _villa_ and its
appurtenances as a sort of Manor Farm, and tenants fell into arrear with
their rent, he had a ready means of indemnifying himself without ‘selling
up’ his old tenants and having possibly much difficulty in finding
better new ones. He could commute arrears of rent into obligations of
service[1189] on the Manor Farm. Most tenants would probably be only too
glad to get rid of the immediate burden of debt. It would seem a better
course than to borrow for that purpose money on which interest would have
to be paid, even supposing that anyone would be willing to lend to a poor
tenant confessedly in difficulties. And such an arrangement would furnish
the landlord with a fixed amount of labour (and labour was becoming
scarcer) on very favourable terms—he or his agent would see to that. But
it was not really necessary to reserve a ‘Manor Farm’ at all, and a man
owning land in several districts would hardly do so in every estate,
if in any. Such a landlord could not readily solve the arrears-problem
by commutation. He was almost compelled[1190] to ‘sell up’ a hopeless
defaulter: and, since most of the stock had probably been supplied by
himself, there would not be much for him to sell. That such cases did
occur, we know for certain; the old tenant went, being free to move,
and to find a good new one was no easy matter, particularly as the land
was sure to have been left in a bad state. Arrears of farm-rents had a
regular phrase (_reliqua colonorum_) assigned to them, and there is good
reason to believe that they were a common source of trouble. It has been
well said[1191] that landlords in Italy were often as badly off as their
tenants. The truth is that the whole agricultural interest was going
downhill.

If the tenant-farmer was, as we see, becoming more and more the central
figure of Italian agriculture, we must next inquire how he stood in
relation to labour. It is _a priori_ probable that a man will be more
ready to work with his own hands on a farm of his own than on one
hired: no man is more alive to the difference of _meum_ and _alienum_
than the tiller of the soil. It is therefore not wonderful that we find
tenant-farmers employing slave labour. From the custom of having slaves
as well as other stock supplied by the landlord we may fairly infer that
tenants were, at least generally, not to be had on other terms. Mommsen
remarks[1192] that actual handwork on the land was more and more directed
rather than performed by the small tenants. Thus it came to be more and
more done by unfree persons. This recognizes, no doubt rightly, that the
system of great estates let in portions to tenants was not favourable
to a revival of free rustic labour, but told effectively against it. He
also points out[1193] that under Roman Law it was possible for a landlord
and his slave to stand in the mutual relation of lessor and lessee. Such
a slave lessee is distinct from the free tenant _colonus_. It appears
that there were two forms of this relation. The slave might be farming
on his own[1194] account, paying a rent and taking the farm-profits
as his _peculium_. In this case he is in the eye of the law _quasi
colonus_. Or he might be farming on his master’s account; then he is
_vilicus_. In both cases he is assumed to have under him slave-labourers
supplied[1195] by the landlord, and it seems that the name _vilicus_ was
sometimes loosely applied even in the former case. In the latter case
he cannot have been very different from the steward of a large estate
worked for owner’s account. I can only conclude that he was put in charge
of a smaller farm-unit and left more to his own devices. Probably this
arrangement would be resorted to only when an ordinary free tenant was
not to be had; and satisfactory ones were evidently not common in the
time of the younger Pliny.

So far as I can see, in this period landlords were gradually ceasing to
keep a direct control over the management of their own estates, but the
changes in progress did not tend to a rehabilitation of free labour.
One detail needs a brief special consideration. The landlord’s agent
(_actor_) is often mentioned, and it is clear that the _actor_ was
generally a slave. But there is reference to the possible case[1196] of
an _actor_ living (like his master) in town, not on the farms, and having
a wife[1197] and daughter. This suggests a freedman, not a slave, and
such cases may have been fairly numerous. Another point for notice is the
question of _vincti, alligati, compediti_, in this period. Mommsen[1198]
treats the chaining of field-slaves as being quite exceptional, in fact a
punishment, in Italy under the Empire. Surely it was always in some sense
a punishment. From what Columella[1199] says of the normal employment
of chained labourers in vineyard-work I can not admit that the evidence
justifies Mommsen’s assertion. That there was a growing reluctance to use
such barbarous methods, and that local usage varied in various parts of
the country, is certain.


XL. DION CHRYSOSTOM.

We have seen that there is no lack of evidence as to the lamentable
condition of Italian agriculture in a large part of the country. But
things were no better in certain Provinces, more particularly in Greece.
Plutarch deplores[1200] the decay and depopulation of his native land,
but the most vivid and significant picture preserved to us is one
conveyed in a public address[1201] by the famous lecturer =Dion of
Prusa=, better known as Dion[1202] Chrysostom. It describes conditions
in the once prosperous island of Euboea. The speaker professes to
have been cast ashore there in a storm, and to have been entertained
with extraordinary kindness by some honest rustics who were living an
industrious and harmless life in the upland parts, the rocky shore of
which was notorious as a scene of shipwrecks. There were two connected
households, squatters in the lonely waste, producing by their own
exertions everything they needed, and of course patterns of every amiable
virtue. The lecturer recounts the story of these interesting people as
told him by his host. How much of it is due to his own imagination, or
put together out of various stories, we cannot judge: but it is manifest
that what concerns us is to feel satisfied that the experiences described
were possible, and not grotesquely improbable, in their setting of place
and time. I venture to accept the story as a sketch of what might very
well have happened, whether it actually did so or not.

We live mostly by the chase, said the hunter, with very little tillage.
This croft (χωρίον) does not belong to us either by inheritance or
purchase. Our fathers, though freemen, were poor like ourselves, just
hired herdsmen, in charge of the herds of a rich man who owned wide
farm-lands and all these mountains. When he died, his estate was
confiscated: It is said that the emperor[1203] made away with him to
get his property. Well, they drove off his live-stock for slaughter,
and our few oxen with them, and never paid our wages. So we did the
best we could, taking advantage of the resources of the neighbourhood
in summer and winter. Since childhood I have only once visited the
city[1204]. A man turned up one day demanding money. We had none, and I
told him so on my oath. He bade me come with him to the city. There I
was arraigned before the mob as a squatter on the public land, without
a grant from the people, and without any payment. It was hinted that we
were wreckers, and had put together a fine property through that wicked
trade. We were said to have valuable farms and abundance of flocks and
herds, beasts of burden, slaves. But a wiser speaker took a different
line. He urged that those who turned the public land to good account
were public benefactors and deserved encouragement. He pointed out that
two thirds of their territory was lying waste through neglect and lack
of population. He was himself a large landowner: whoever was willing to
cultivate his land was welcome to do so free of charge,—indeed he would
reward him for his pains—the improvement would be worth it. He proposed
a plan for inducing citizens to reclaim the derelict lands, rent-free
for ten years, and after that rented at a moderate share of the crops.
To aliens less favourable terms might be offered, but with a prospect of
citizenship in case of reclamation on a large scale. By such a policy the
evils of idleness and poverty would be got rid of. These considerations
he enforced by pointing to the pitiful state of the city itself. Outside
the gates you find, not a suburb but a hideous desert. Within the walls
we grow crops and graze beasts on the sites of the gymnasium and the
market-place. Statues of gods and heroes are smothered in the growing
corn. Yet we are forsooth to expel these hard-working folks and to leave
men nothing to do but to rob or steal.

The rustic, being called upon to state his own case, described the
poverty of the squatter families, the innocence of their lives, their
services to shipwrecked seafarers, and so forth. On the last topic he
received a dramatic confirmation from a man in the crowd, who had himself
been one of a party of castaways hospitably relieved three years before
by these very people. So all ended well. The stress laid on the simple
rusticity of the rustic, and the mutual distrust and mean jealousy of
the townsfolk, shew in numerous touches that we have in this narrative
a highly coloured scene. But the picture of the decayed city, with its
ancient walls a world too wide for its shrunk population, is companion to
that of the deserted countryside. Both panels of this mournful diptych
could have been paralleled in the case of many a city and territory in
Italy and Greece. The moral reflexions, in which the lecturer proceeds
to apply the lessons of the narrative, are significant. He enlarges on
the superiority of the poor to the rich in many virtues, unselfishness
in particular. Poverty in itself is not naturally an evil. If men will
only work with their own hands, they may supply their own needs, and
live a life worthy of freemen. The word αὐτουργεῖν occurs more than once
in this spirited appeal, shewing clearly that Dion had detected the
plague-spot in the civilization of his day. But he honestly admits the
grave difficulties that beset artisans in the various trades practised
in towns. They lack necessary[1205] capital: everything has to be paid
for, food clothing lodging fuel and what not, for they get nothing free
but water, and own nothing but their bodies. Yet we cannot advise them to
engage in foul degrading vocations. We desire them to live honourably,
not to sink below the standards of the greedy usurer or the owners of
lodging-houses or ships or gangs of slaves. What then are we to do with
the decent poor? Shall we have to propose turning them out of the cities
and settling them on allotments in the country? Tradition tells us rural
settlement prevailed throughout Attica of yore: and the system worked
well, producing citizens of a better and more discreet type than the
town-bred mechanics who thronged the Assemblies and law-courts of Athens.

It may be said that Dion is a mere itinerant philosopher, who travels
about seeing the world and proposing impracticable remedies for
contemporary evils in popular sermons to idle audiences. But he knew his
trade, and his trade was to make his hearers ‘feel better’ for attending
his discourses. When he portrays the follies or vices of the age, he is
dealing with matters of common knowledge, and not likely to misrepresent
facts seriously. When he suggests remedies, it matters little that
there is no possibility of applying them. Present company are always
excepted, and the townsfolk who listened to the preacher would neither
resent his strictures on city life nor have the slightest intention of
setting their own hands to the spade or plough. That there was a kind of
moral reaction[1206] in this period, and that lecturers and essayists
contributed something to the revival of healthier public sentiment, I do
not dispute; though I think too much success is sometimes[1207] ascribed
to their good intentions. At any rate they cannot be credited with
improving the conditions of rustic life. To the farmer the voice of the
great world outside was represented by the collectors of rents and taxes,
the exactors of services, not by the sympathetic homilies of popular
teachers.


XLI. NEW TESTAMENT WRITERS.

The authors of the books of the New Testament, whom it is convenient
to view together as a group of witnesses bearing on the condition of a
part of the Roman East under the early Empire, supply some interesting
matter. We read of an agriculture that includes corn-growing, the culture
of vines, and pastoral industry: the olive, and above all the fig-tree,
appear as normal objects of the countryside. Plough spade and sickle,
storehouse threshing-floor and winepress, are the familiar appliances
of rustic life, as they had been from time immemorial. Farmers need not
only hard work, but watchfulness and forethought, for the business of
their lives. Live stock have to be protected from beasts of prey, and
need endless care. And the rustic’s outlook is ever clouded by the fear
of drought and murrain. All this is an ordinary picture, common to many
lands: only the anxiety about water-supply is perhaps specially Oriental.
The ox and the ass are the chief beasts of draught and burden. In short,
country life goes on as of old, and much as it still does after many
changes of rulers.

From the way in which farmers are generally spoken of I infer that they
are normally peasant[1208] landowners. That is to say, not tenants of
an individual landlord, but holding their farms with power of sale and
right of succession, liable to tribute. The Roman state is strictly
speaking the owner, having succeeded to the royal ownership assumed by
the Seleucid kings. But that there was also letting[1209] of estates
to tenant-farmers is clear, for we read of collection of rents. At the
same time we find it suggested, apparently as a moral rather than legal
obligation, that the toiling farmer has the first claim[1210] on the
produce, and the ox is not to be muzzled. Such passages, and others
insisting on honesty and the duty of labour, keep us firmly reminded of
the moral aims pervading the works of these writers. In other words, they
are more concerned to define what ought to be than to record what is.
Many of the significant references to rustic matters occur in parables.
But we must not forget that a parable would have little force if its
details were not realistic.

Of the figures appearing on the agricultural scene we may distinguish
the wealthy landlord[1211], whether farming for his own account or
letting his land to tenants: the steward[1212] farming for his lord’s
account: the tenant-farmer: probably the free peasant on a small holding
of his own. Labour is represented by the farmer working with his own
hands, and by persons employed simply as labourers. These last are
either freemen or slaves. Slavery is assumed as a normal condition, but
a reader can hardly help being struck by the notable passages in which
the wage-earner appears as a means of illustrating an important point.
Does the occurrence of such passages suggest that in these Oriental
surroundings wage-service was as common a system as bond-service, perhaps
even more so? I hesitate to draw this conclusion, for the following
reason. Accepting the fact of slavery (as the writers do), there was not
much to be said beyond enjoining humanity on masters and conscientious
and respectful service on slaves. But the relation between hirer and
hired, presumably a bargain, opened up far-reaching issues of equity,
transcending questions of formal law. Hence we hear much about it. That
the workman is worthy of his meat (ἐργάτης ... τροφῆς) is a proposition
of which we have an earlier[1213] version, referring to slaves. The
cowardice of the hireling shepherd points a notable moral. The rich who
defraud the reaper of his hire[1214] meet with scathing denunciation. For
to him that worketh the reward is not reckoned[1215] of grace but of debt.

This last proposition seems to furnish a key to the remarkable
parable[1216] of the Labourers in the Vineyard, which has been subjected
to many diverse interpretations. If we accept the view that the wages
represent the Kingdom of God, and that this reward is granted not of debt
but of grace, it is clear that great stress is laid on the autocratic
position of the householder (οἰκοδεσπότης). His treatment of the hired
labourers is an assertion of entire indifference to what we call
‘economic’ considerations. How it is to be interpreted as equitable,
theologians must decide, or be content to leave modern handworkers to
draw their own conclusions. My interest in the matter may be shewn in the
question whether this householder is to be regarded as a typical figure,
or not. I trust I am guilty of no irreverence in saying that to me he
seems a purely hypothetical character. That is to say that I take the
gist of the parable to be this: if an employer chose to deal with his
hirelings on such arbitrary principles, he would be acting within his
rights. I do not infer that such conduct was likely in ordinary life, or
even that a concrete case of its occurrence had ever been known. I cannot
believe that in a country where debts[1217] and usury are referred to
as matters of course, and where masters entrusted money[1218] to their
slaves for purposes of trade, where sales of land[1219] were an ordinary
business transaction, a sane individualistic capitalist would act as the
man in this parable. Those who think differently must clear up their own
difficulties. I would add that this parable, the details of which seem to
me non-realistic, only occurs in one of the Gospels. Is it possible that
it is based on some current Oriental story?


XLII. MARTIAL AND JUVENAL.

Among the witnesses, other than technical writers, from whom we get
evidence as to the conditions of agriculture under the Empire, are two
poets, Martial and Juvenal. The latter, a native of Aquinum in the old
Volscian part of Latium, never shook off the influence of his connexion
with rural Italy. The former, a native of Bilbilis in Spain, was one of
the gifted provincials who came to Rome as the literary centre of the
world. He spent more than thirty years there, and made an unrivalled name
as a writer of epigrams, but his heart was in Spain. The attitude of
these two men towards the facts of their time is very different, and the
difference affects the value of their evidence. In the satires of Juvenal
indignant rhetoric takes up a high moral position, and declaims fiercely
against abominations. Now this attitude is beset with temptations to
overstate an evil rather than weaken effect. Moreover, in imperial Rome
it was necessary to be very careful: not only were personal references
dangerous, but it was above all things necessary to avoid provoking
the Emperor. Yet even Emperors could (and did) view attacks upon their
predecessors with indifference or approval: while vicious contemporaries
were not likely to put on the cap if their deceased counterparts were
assailed. So the satirist, confining his strictures mainly to the past,
is not often a contemporary witness of the first order. It is fortunate
that his references to rustic conditions are not much affected by this
limitation: but they mostly refer to the past. =Martial= on the contrary
is a mere man of his time. His business is not to censure, still less to
reform, but to find themes for light verse such as will hit the taste of
average Roman readers. He soon discovered that scandal was the one staple
topic of interest, and exploited it as a source of ‘copy’ down to the
foulest dregs. Most of the characters exposed appear under fictitious
Greek names, but doubtless Roman gossips applied the filthy imputations
to each other. We need not suppose that Martial’s ruling passion was
for bawdy epigram. But he knew what would hit the taste of an idle and
libidinous world. For himself, nothing is clearer than that he found
life in the great city a sore trial, not solely from the oppressive
climate at certain seasons of the year. He was too clever a man not to
suffer weariness in such surroundings. He had to practice the servility
habitually displayed by poor men towards the rich and influential, but
he did not like it. It seems to have been through patronage that he got
together sufficient wealth to enable him eventually to retire to his
native country. The din and dirt and chronic unrest of Rome were to him,
as to Juvenal, an abomination: and from these ever-present evils there
was, for dwellers in mean houses or crowded blocks of sordid flats, no
escape. Both writers agree that the Rome of those days was only fit
for the wealthy to live in. Secure in his grand mansion on one of the
healthiest sites, with plenty of elbow-room, guarded against unwelcome
intrusions by a host of slaves and escorted by them in public, the
millionaire could take his life easily: he could even sleep. Martial
had his way to make as a man of letters, and needed to keep brain and
nerves in working order. For this, occasional retirement from the
urban pandemonium was necessary. So he managed to acquire a little
suburban[1220] property, where he could spend days in peace and quiet.
Many of his friends did the same. To keep such a place, however small,
in good order, and to grow some country produce, however little, it was
necessary to have a resident[1221] _vilicus_. He had also a _vilica_,
and there would probably be a slave or two under them. The poet was now
better off, and doing as others did. These _suburbana_, retreats for
the weary, were evidently numerous. Their agricultural significance
was small. Martial often pokes fun at the owners who withdraw to the
country for a holiday, taking with them[1222] their supplies of eatables
bought in the markets of Rome. Clearly the city markets were well
supplied: and this indicates the existence of another class of suburban
properties, market-gardens on a business footing, of which we hear little
directly. An industry of this kind springs up round every great centre
of population: how far it can extend depends on the available means
of delivering the produce in fair marketable condition. Round Rome it
had no doubt existed for centuries, and was probably one of the most
economically sound agricultural undertakings in central Italy. That it
was conducted on a small scale and was prosperous may be the reason why
it attracted little notice in literature.

Though Martial cannot be regarded as an authority on Italian agriculture,
it so happens that passages of his works are important and instructive,
particularly in connexion with matters of land-management and
farm-labour. He gives point to his epigrams by short and vivid touches,
above all by telling contrasts. Now this style of writing loses most of
its force if the details lack reality. He was therefore little tempted
to go beyond the truth in matters of ordinary non-bestial life, such
as agricultural conditions; we may accept him as a good witness. To
begin with an all-important topic, let us see what we get from him on
the management of land, either for the landlord’s account under a slave
_vilicus_, or by letting it to a free _colonus_. In explaining the
gloomy bearing of Selius, he remarks[1223] that it is not due to recent
losses: his wife and his goods and his slaves are all safe, and he is
not suffering from any failures of a tenant or a steward. Here _colonus_
as opposed to _vilicus_ must mean a free tenant, who might be behindhand
with his rent or with service due under his lease. The opposition occurs
elsewhere, as when he refers[1224] to the produce sent in to a rich man
in Rome from his country estates by his steward or tenant. So too on
the birthday of an eminent advocate all his clients and dependants send
gifts; among them[1225] the hunter sends a hare, the fisherman some
fish, and the _colonus_ a kid. The _venator_ and _piscator_ are very
likely his slaves. In protesting[1226] against the plague of kissing as
it strikes a man on return to Rome, he says, ‘all the neighbours kiss
you, and the _colonus_ too with his hairy unsavoury mouth.’ It seems to
imply that the rustic tenant would come to Town to pay his respects to
his landlord. Barring the kiss, the duty of welcoming the squire makes
one think of times not long gone by in England. In one passage[1227]
there is a touch suggestive of almost medieval relations. How Linus has
managed to get through a large inherited fortune, is a mystery in need
of an explanation. He has not been a victim of the temptations of the
great wicked city. No, he has always lived in a country town, where
economy was not only possible but easy. Everything he needed was to be
had cheap or gratis, and there was nothing to lead him into extravagant
ways. Now among the instances of cheapness is the means of satisfying
his sexual passions when they become unruly. At such moments either
the _vilica_ or the _duri nupta coloni_ served his turn. The steward’s
consort would be his slave, and there is no more to be said: but the
tenant-farmer’s wife, presumably a free woman, is on a different footing.
There is no suggestion of hoodwinking the husband, for the situation is
treated as a matter of course. It would rather seem that the landlord
is represented as relying on the complaisance of a dependent boor. If I
interpret the passage rightly, we have in it a vivid sidelight on the
position of some at least of the _coloni_ of the first century AD. That
_vilici_ and _coloni_ alike were usually clumsy rustics of small manual
skill, is suggested by two passages[1228] in which they are credited with
bungling workmanship in wood or stone. Perhaps we may detect reference
to a _colonus_ in an epigram on a man who spends his money lavishly on
his own debaucheries but is meanly niggardly to necessitous friends. It
says ‘you sell ancestral lands to pay for a passing gratification of your
lust, while your friend, left in the lurch, is tilling land[1229] that
is not his own.’ That is, you might have made him a present of a little
farm, as many another has done; but you have left him to sink into a mere
_colonus_. Enough has now been said to shew that these tenant-farmers
were a humble and dependent class of men, and that the picture drawn
from passages of Martial corresponds to that drawn above in Weber’s
interpretation of Columella.

It is not necessary to set out with the same fulness all the evidence
of Martial on agricultural matters regarded from various points of
view. The frequent reference to the land is a striking fact: like his
fellow-countryman Columella, he was clearly interested in the land-system
of Italy. He shews wide knowledge of the special products of different
districts; a knowledge probably picked up at first in the markets of
Rome, and afterwards increased by experience. No writer draws the line
more distinctly between productive and unproductive estates. That we
hear very much more of the latter is no wonder: so long as the supremacy
of Rome was unshaken, and money poured into Italy, a great part of the
country was held by wealthy owners to whom profit was a less urgent
motive than pleasure or pride. To what lengths ostentation could go is
seen[1230] in the perverse fancy of a millionaire to have a real _rus in
urbe_ with grounds about his town house so spacious that they included
a real vineyard: here in sheltered seclusion he could have a vintage in
Rome. This is in truth the same vulgar ambition as that (much commoner)
of the man who prides himself on treating guests at his country mansion
to every luxury procurable in Rome. It is merely inverted.

At this point it is natural to ask whence came the vast sums lavished
on these and other forms of luxury. Italy was not a great manufacturing
country. The regular dues from the Provinces flowed into the treasuries,
not openly into private pockets. Yet a good deal of these monies no doubt
did in the end become the reward of individuals, as salaries or amounts
payable to contractors, etc. These however would not by themselves
suffice to account for the immense squandering that evidently took place.
A source of incomes, probably much more productive than we might at first
sight imagine, existed in the huge estates owned by wealthy Romans in
the lands beyond the seas. Martial refers[1231] to such properties at
Patrae in Achaia, in Egypt, etc. The returns from these estates, however
badly managed, were in the total probably very large. And they were no
new thing. In Varro and in Cicero’s letters we find them treated as a
matter of course: the case of Atticus and his lands in Epirus is well
known. Pliny[1232] tells us of the case of Pompey, and also of the six
land-monopolizers whom Nero found in possession of 50% of the Province
of Africa. The practice of usury in the subject countries was no longer
so widespread or so remunerative as it had been in the last period of
the Republic, but it had not ceased, and the same is true of the farming
of revenues. Commerce was active: but we are rather concerned with the
means of paying for imported goods than with the fact of importation.
The anxiety as to the supply of corn from abroad shews itself in the
gossip[1233] of quidnuncs as to the fleet of freight-ships coming from
Alexandria. Puteoli and Ostia were doubtless very busy; all we need note
is that someone must have made money[1234] in the business of transport
and delivery. These considerations may serve to explain the presence of
so much ‘money in the country’ as we say, and the resulting extravagance.
But all this social and economic fabric rested on the security guaranteed
by the imperial forces on land and sea.

One of Martial’s epigrams[1235] is of special interest as describing
a manifestly exceptional estate. It was at or near Baiae, the famous
seaside pleasure-resort, which had been the scene of costly fancies
and luxurious living for more than a hundred years. The point of
the poem lies in the striking contrast of this place compared with
the unproductive _suburbanum_[1236] of another owner, which is kept
going by supplies from the Roman market. For the place is a genuine
unsophisticated country farm, producing corn and wine and good store of
firewood, and breeding cattle swine sheep and various kinds of poultry
and pigeons. When rustic neighbours come to pay their respects, they
bring presents, such as honey in the comb, cheese, dormice, a kid, a
capon. The daughters[1237] of honest tenants bring baskets of eggs. The
_villa_ is a centre of hospitality; even the slaves are well fed. The
presence of a slave-household brought from Town is particularly dwelt
on: what with fishing and trapping and with ‘light work’ in the garden,
these spoilt menials, even my lord’s pet eunuch, are happy enough. There
are also young home-bred slaves (_vernae_) probably the offspring of the
farm-slaves. The topsyturvydom of this epigram is so striking that one
may suspect Martial of laughing in his sleeve at the eccentric friend
whose farm he is praising. In any case this cannot be taken seriously
as a realistic picture of a country seat practically agricultural. The
owner evidently drew his income from other sources. And the sort of man
who treated himself to an eunuch can hardly have been much of a farmer,
even near Baiae. The mention of _probi coloni_ illustrates what has been
said above as to tenants, and that a farm could be described in such
words as _rure vero barbaroque_ is a candid admission that in too many
instances a place of the kind could only by courtesy be styled a farm,
since the intrusion of ‘civilization’ (that is, of refined and luxurious
urban elements) destroyed its practical rustic character. That the
estate in question produced enough to feed the owner and his guests, his
domestics brought from Rome, and the resident rustic staff as well, is
credible. But there is nothing to shew that it produced any surplus for
the markets: it may have done something in this direction, but that it
really paid its way, yielding a moderate return on the capital sunk in
land slaves and other farm-stock, is utterly incredible.

Whether in town or country, the life sketched by Martial is that of a
society resting on a basis of slavery. At the same time the supply of
new slaves[1238] was not so plentiful as it had been in days before the
Roman Peace under Augustus. Serviceable rustic slaves were valuable
nowadays. Addressing Faustinus, the wealthy owner of the above Baian
_villa_ and several others, the poet says ‘you can send this book[1239]
to Marcellinus, who is now at the end of his campaign in the North and
has leisure to read: but let your messenger be a dainty Greek page.
Marcellinus will requite you by sending you a slave, captive from the
Danube country, who has the making of a shepherd in him, to tend the
flocks on your estate by Tibur.’ Each friend is to send the other
what the other lacks and he is in a position to supply. This is a
single instance; but the suggested _do ut des_ is significant. As wars
became rarer, and prisoners fewer, the disposal of captives would be a
perquisite of more and more value. That the normal treatment of slaves
was becoming more and more humane, is certain. But whether humanitarian
sentiment in Stoic forms, as preached by Seneca and others, had much
to do with this result, is more doubtful. The wisdom of not provoking
discontent among the slaves, particularly in the country, was well
understood. The decline of the free rustic population had made the
absence of a regular police force a danger not to be ignored. Improved
conditions were probably in most cases due to self-interest and caution
much more than to humane sentiment. In Martial’s day we may gather from
numerous indications that in general the lot of slaves was not a hard one
if we except the legal right of self-disposal. Urban domestics were often
sadly spoilt, and were apt to give themselves great airs outside the
house or to callers at the door. But I believe that in respect of comfort
and happiness the position of a steward with a slave-staff in charge of
a country place owned by a rich man was in most cases far pleasanter.
Subject to the preparation for the master’s occasional visits and
entertainment of his guests, these men were left very much to their own
devices. The site of the _villa_ had been chosen for its advantages. So
long as enough work was done to satisfy the owner, they, his caretakers,
enjoyed gratis for the whole year[1240] the privileges and pleasures
which he paid for dearly and seldom used.

It seems certain that it was on such estates that most of the
slave-breeding took place. It was becoming a more regular practice, as we
see from Columella. And it had advantages from several points of view.
The slave allowed to mate with a female partner and produce children
was more effectively tied to the place than the unmated labourer on a
plantation was by his chain. So long as the little _vernae_ were not
brutally treated (and it seems to have been a tradition to treat them
well), the parents were much less likely to join in any rebellious
schemes. And, after all, the young of slaves were worth money, if sold;
while, if kept by the old master, they would work in what was the only
home they had known: they would be easier to train and manage than some
raw barbarian from Germany or Britain or the Sudan. But it must not be
forgotten that the recognition of slave-breeding foreboded the eventual
decline of slavery—personal slavery—as an institution, at least for
purposes of rustic life. I know of no direct evidence[1241] as to the
class or classes from which the unfree _coloni_ of the later Empire were
drawn. But it seems to me extremely probable that many of the _coloni_
of the period with which we are just now concerned were home-bred
slaves manumitted and kept on the estate as tenants. This conjecture
finds a reason for manumission, as the freedman would be capable of a
legal relation, which the slave was not. The freedman’s son would be
_ingenuus_, and would represent, in his economic bondage under cover of
legal freedom, a natural stage in the transition from the personal slave
to the predial serf.

That there were _vernae_ on the small suburban properties, the
rest-retreats of Martial and many others, is not to be doubted. But they
can hardly have been very numerous. These little places were often but
poorly kept up. The owners were seldom wealthy men, able to maintain
many slaves. Economy and quiet were desired by men who could not afford
ostentation. The normal use of the epithet _sordidus_[1242] (not peculiar
to Martial) in speaking of such places, and indeed of small farmsteads
in general, is characteristic of them and of the undress life led there.
The house was sometimes in bad condition. To patch up a leaky roof[1243]
a present of a load of tiles was welcome. A man buys a place the house
(_casa_) on which is horribly dark and old: the poet remarks that it is
close to the pleasure-garden (_hortos_) of a rich man. This explains
the purchase: the buyer will put up with bad lodging for the prospect
of good dinners at his neighbour’s table. The difficulty of finding a
purchaser for an estate of bad sanitary record, and the damage done to
riparian farms by the Tiber floods, are instances[1244] of the ordinary
troubles of the little landowners near Rome. A peculiar nuisance, common
in Italy, was the presence in some corner of a field of the tomb[1245]
of some former owner or his family. A slice of the land, so many feet
in length and breadth, was often reserved[1246] as not to pass with the
inheritance. What the heir never owned, that he could not sell. So, when
the property changed hands, the new owner had no right to remove what to
him might be nothing but a hindrance to convenient tillage. Altars[1247]
taken over from a predecessor may also have been troublesome at times,
but their removal was probably less difficult.

The picture of agricultural conditions to be drawn from =Juvenal= agrees
with that drawn from Martial. But, as said above, the point of view is
different in the satirist, whose business it is to denounce evils, and
who is liable to fall into rhetorical exaggeration. And to a native of
central Italy the tradition of a healthier state of things in earlier
ages was naturally a more important part of his background than it could
be to a man from Spain. Hence we find vivid scenes[1248] drawn from
legend, shewing good old Romans, men of distinction, working on the land
themselves and rearing well-fed families (slaves included) on the produce
of meagre little plots of two _iugera_. An ex-consul[1249] breaks off his
labours on a hillside, shoulders his mattock, and joins a rustic feast
at the house of a relative. The hill-folk of the Abruzzi are patterns of
thrifty contentment, ready to earn their bread[1250] with the plough. But
the civic duties are not forgotten. The citizen has a double function.
He serves the state in arms and receives a patch of land[1251] as his
reward for wounds suffered. He has to attend the Assembly before his
wounds[1252] are fully healed. In short, he is a peasant soldier who
does a public duty in both peace and war. The vital need of the present
day[1253] is that parents should rear sons of this type. Here we have the
moral which these scenes, and the frequent references to ancient heroes,
are meant to impress on contemporaries. A striking instance[1254] from
historical times is that of Marius, who is represented as having risen
from the position of a wage-earning farm-labourer to be the saviour of
Rome from the barbarians of the North. But the men of the olden time
led simple lives, free from the extravagance and luxury of these days
and therefore from the temptations and ailments that now abound. The
only wholesome surroundings[1255] now are to be found in out-of-the way
country corners or the homes of such frugal citizens as Juvenal himself.
But these are mere islets in a sea of wantonness bred in security: luxury
is deadlier[1256] than the sword, and the conquered world is being
avenged in the ruin of its conqueror. Perhaps no symptom on which he
enlarges is more significant and sinister from his own point of view than
that betrayed in a passing reference by the verbal contrast[1257] between
_paganus_ and _miles_. The peasant is no longer soldier: and in this fact
the weightiest movements of some 250 years of Roman history are virtually
implied.

So much for an appeal to the Roman past. But Juvenal, like Vergil before
him, was not content with this. He looks back to the primitive age[1258]
of man’s appearance on earth and idealizes the state of things in this
picture also. Mankind, rude healthy and chaste, had not yet reached
the notion of private property: therefore theft was unknown. The moral
is not pressed in the passage where this description occurs; but it is
worth noting because the greed of men in imperial Rome, and particularly
in the form of land-grabbing and villa-building, is a favourite topic
in the satires. All this side of contemporary life, viewed as the fruit
of artificial appetites and unnecessary passions, is evidence of a
degeneracy that has been going on ever since the beginnings of society.
And the worst of it is that those who thrive on present conditions are
the corrupt the servile and the mean, from whom no improvement can be
hoped for. Juvenal’s picture of present facts as he sees them is quite
enough to justify his pessimism. As a means of arresting degeneration he
is only able to suggest a change[1259] of mind, in fact to urge people
to be other than they are. But he cannot shew where the initiative is to
be found. Certainly not in the mongrel free populace of Rome, a rabble
of parasites and beggars. Nor in the ranks of the wealthy freedmen into
whose hands the chief opportunities of enrichment have passed, thanks to
the imperial jealousy of genuine Romans and preference of supple aliens.
These freedmen are the typical capitalists: they buy up everything, land
included; and Romans who despise these upstarts have nevertheless to fawn
on them. Nor again are leaders to be found in the surviving remnant of
old families. It is a sad pity, but pride of birth, while indisposing
them to useful industry, does not prevent them from debauchery or from
degrading themselves in public. Financial ruin and charges of high
treason are destroying them: even were this not so, who would look
to such persons for a wholesome example? Neither religion with its
formalities and excitements, nor philosophy with its professors belying
their moral preaching, could furnish the means of effecting the change of
heart needed for vital reform.

No, it was not from the imperial capital, the reeking hotbed of
wickedness, that any good could come. And when Juvenal turns to the
country it is remarkable how little comfort he seems to find in the
rural conditions of Italy. Like other writers, he refers to the immense
estates[1260] that extended over a great part of the country, both arable
and grazing lands (_saltus_), the latter in particular being of monstrous
size. We cannot get from him any hint that the land-monopoly, the canker
of the later Republic, had been effectually checked. Nor indeed had
it. One of the ways in which rich patrons[1261] rewarded clients for
services, honourable or (as he suggests) often dishonourable, was to give
the dependant a small landed estate. The practice was not new. Maecenas
had given Horace his Sabine farm. But the man who gave away acres must
have had plenty of acres to give. True, some of the great landlords had
earned[1262] their estates by success in an honourable profession: but
the satirist is naturally more impressed by the cases of those, generally
freedmen, whose possessions are the fruit of corrupt compliance or
ignoble trades. These upstarts, like the Trimalchio of Petronius, live
to display their wealth, and the acquisition of lands[1263] and erection
of costly villas are a means to this end. The fashion set by them is
followed by others, and over-buying and over-building are the cause of
bankruptcies. Two passages[1264] indicate the continued existence of an
atrocious evil notorious in the earlier period of the _latifundia_, the
practice of compelling small holders to part with their land by various
outrages. The live stock belonging to a rich neighbour are driven on to
the poor man’s farm until the damage thus caused to his crops forces him
to sell—of course at the aggressor’s price. A simpler form, ejectment
without pretence of purchase, is mentioned as an instance of the
difficulties in the way of getting legal redress, at least for civilians.
There would be little point in mentioning such wrongs as conceivable
possibilities: surely they must have occurred now and then in real life.
The truth, I take it, was that the great landlord owning a host of slaves
had always at disposal a force well able to carry out his territorial
ambitions; and possession of power was a temptation to use it. The
employment of slaves in rural border-raids was no new thing, and the
slave, having himself nothing to lose, probably found zest in a change of
occupation.

In Juvenal agriculture appears as carried on by slave labour, and the
employment of supplementary wage-earners is ignored; not unnaturally,
for it was not necessary to refer to it. The satirist himself[1265]
has rustic slaves, and is proud that they are rustic, when they on a
special occasion come in to wait at his table in Rome. Slaves are of
course included[1266] in the stock of an estate, great or small, given
or sold. All this is commonplace: what is more to the satirist’s purpose
is the mention[1267] of a member of an illustrious old family who has
come down in the world so low as to tend another man’s flocks for hire.
And this is brought in as a contrast to the purse-proud insolence of a
wealthy freedman. But more remarkable is the absence of any reference to
tenant _coloni_. Even the word _colonus_ does not occur in any shade of
meaning. This too may fairly be accounted for by the fact that little
could have been got out of references to the system for the purposes of
his argument. It was, as he knew, small peasant landowners, not tenants,
that had been the backbone of old Rome; and it was this class, viewed
with the sympathetic eye of one sighing for perished glories, that he
would have liked to restore. It is a satirist’s bent to wish for the
unattainable and protest against the inevitable. For himself, he can
sing the praises of rustic simplicity and cheapness and denounce the
luxury and extravagance of Roman society, though he dare not assail
living individuals. And in exposing the rottenness of the civilization
around him he attacks the very vices that had grown to such portentous
heights through the development of slavery. Idleness bore its fruit,
not only in the debauchery and gambling that fostered unholy greed and
crimes committed to procure the money that was ever vanishing, but in
the degradation of honest labour. Pampered menials were arrogant, poor
citizens servile. And vast tracts of Italian land bore witness to the
mournful fact that the land system, so far from affording a sound basis
for social and economic betterment, was itself one of the worst elements
of the situation.

At this stage it is well to recall the relation between agriculture and
military service, the farmer-soldier ideal. The long-since existing
tendency for the soldier to become a professional, while the free farmer
class was decaying, had never obliterated the impression of this ideal
on Roman minds. The belief that gymnastic exercises on Greek models
were no effective substitute for regular manual labour in the open air
as guarantees of military ‘fitness’ is still strong in Juvenal. It
shews itself in his pictures of life in Rome, where such exercises were
practised for the purpose of ‘keeping fit’ and ‘getting an appetite,’
much as they are now. Followed by baths and massage and luxurious
appliances of every kind, this treatment enabled the jaded city-dweller
to minimize the enervating effects of idleness relieved by excitements
and debauchery. He significantly lays stress on the fact that these
habits were as common among women as among men. The usual allowance must
be made for a satirist’s exaggeration; but the general truth of the
picture is not to be doubted. The city life was no preparation for the
camp with its rough appliances and ever-present need for the readiness
to endure cheerfully the hardships of the field. The toughness of the
farm-labourer was proverbial: the Latin word _durus_ is his conventional
epithet. In other words, he was a model of healthy hardness and vigour.
Now to Juvenal, as to others, the best object of desire[1268] was _mens
sana in corpore sano_, and he well knew that to secure the second
gave the best hope of securing the first. We might then expect him to
recommend field work as the surest way to get and keep vigorous health.
Yet I cannot find any indication of this precept save the advice to a
friend to get out of Rome and settle on a garden-plot in the country.
He says ‘there live devoted[1269] to your clod-pick; be the _vilicus_
of a well-tended garden.’ I presume he means ‘be your own steward, and
lend a hand in tillage as a steward would do.’ But an average _vilicus_
would be more concerned to get work out of his underlings than to exert
himself, and Juvenal is not very explicit in his advice, the main point
being to get his friend out of Rome. I have reserved for comparison
with this passage one from Martial[1270]. In a couplet on a pair of
_halteres_ (something rather like dumb-bells) he says ‘Why waste the
strength of arms by use of silly dumb-bells? If a man wants exercise,
he had better go and dig in a vineyard.’ This is much plainer, but one
may doubt whether it is seriously meant to be an ordinary rule of life.
Probably it is no more than a sneer at gymnastic exercises. For Martial
well knew that muscle developed by the practice of athletics[1271] is
very different from the bodily firmness and capacity for continuous
effort under varying conditions that is produced by a life of hard manual
labour. And the impression left on a reader’s mind by epigrammatist and
satirist alike is that in Rome and in the most favoured and accessible
parts of Italy the blessing of ‘corporal soundness’ was tending to become
a monopoly of slaves. For when Juvenal declares[1272] that nowadays the
rough _fossor_, though shackled with a heavy chain, turns up his nose at
the garden-stuff that fed a Manius Curius in the olden days, hankering
after the savoury fleshpots of the cook-shop, we need not take him too
seriously.


XLIII. PLINY THE YOUNGER.

The =younger Pliny=, one of the generation who remembered Vespasian,
lived through the dark later years of Domitian, and rejoiced in the
better times of Nerva and Trajan, is one of our most important witnesses.
Not being a technical writer on agriculture, it was not his business
to dwell on what ought to be done rather than what was being done.
Being himself a great landowner as well as a man of wide interests and
high reputation, he knew the problems of contemporary land-management
from experience, and speaks with intelligence and authority. He was
not a man of robust constitution, and like many others he found much
refreshment in rural sojournings. He is remarkable for keen appreciation
of beautiful scenery. Adopted by his uncle, the author of the _Natural
History_, well-educated and in touch with the literary circles and the
best social life of Rome, his letters illustrate the intellectual and
moral influences that prevailed in cultivated households of honest
gentlemen. In particular he is to us perhaps the very best example
of the humanizing tendency of the current philosophies of the day in
relation to the subject of slavery. He is deeply interested in promoting
manumissions[1273] whenever he gets a chance. His tender concern for the
welfare of his slaves constantly meets us, and he is only consoled for
the death of one by reflecting that the man was manumitted in time[1274]
and so died free. In fact he does not regard slavery as a normally
lifelong condition; and he allows his slaves to make informal wills and
respects their disposition of their savings among their fellows[1275]
in the household, which is to slaves a sort of commonwealth. Masters
who don’t feel the loss of their slaves are really not human. But this
all refers to domestics, and does not touch the case of the field-hand
toiling on the farm.

A transaction[1276] in reference to the sale of some land by the lake
of Como, Pliny’s own neighbourhood, illustrates the normal changes of
ownership that were going on, and his own generous nature. An old lady,
an intimate friend of his mother, wanted to have a property in that
lovely district. Pliny gave her the offer of any of his land at her own
price, reserving only certain parcels for sentimental reasons. Before
(as it seems) any bargain was made, a friend died and left ⁵⁄₁₂ of his
estate to Pliny, including some land such as the old lady desired. Pliny
at once sent his freedman Hermes to offer her the suitable parcels for
sale. She promptly clinched the bargain with Hermes at a figure which
turned out to be only ⁷⁄₉ of the full value. Pliny’s attention was called
to this, but he stood by the act of his freedman and ratified the sale.
The _publicani_ who were then farming the 5% duty on successions soon
appeared, and claimed the 5% as reckoned on estimated full value of
the property. The old lady settled with them on these terms, and then
insisted on paying to Pliny the full value, not the bargained price;
which offer he, not to be outdone, gracefully declined. Such was the
course of a commonplace transaction, carried out by exceptional people in
an unselfish spirit. We are most certainly not to suppose that this sort
of thing was common in land-dealings. Another letter[1277] shews us how
a well-meant benefaction might fail in its aim for want of means in the
beneficiary. An old slave-woman, once Pliny’s wet-nurse, had evidently
been manumitted, and he made her a present of a small farm (_agellum_)
to provide her maintenance. At that time its market value was ample to
secure this. But things went wrong. For some reason the yearly returns
fell, and the market value fell also. Whether the old woman had tried
to manage it herself and failed, or whether a bad tenant had let down
the cultivation, does not plainly appear. At any rate Pliny was greatly
relieved when a friend, presumably one living near the place, undertook
to direct the cultivation of the farm. He expresses his confidence that
under the new management the holding would recover its value. For his own
credit, not less than for the advantage of his nurse, he wishes to see it
produce its utmost. These little holdings no doubt needed very skilful
management, and I suspect that idle slaves were in this case the cause
of the trouble. Slaves commonly went with land, and I do not think the
generous donor would give his old nurse the bare land without the needful
labour. The old ‘Mammy’ could not control them, and Pliny’s friend saved
the situation.

Trajan’s order, requiring Provincial candidates for office to invest a
third[1278] of their property in Italian real estate, and the artificial
rise of prices for the time, has been dealt with above. Pliny advised a
friend, if he would be not sorry[1279] to part with his Italian estates,
to sell now at the top of the market and buy land in the Provinces,
where prices would be correspondingly lowered. Of the risks attendant on
landowning in Italy he was well aware, and one letter[1280] on the pros
and cons of a tempting purchase must be translated in full. He writes
thus to a friend.

‘I am doing as usual, asking your advice on a matter of business. There
are now for sale some landed properties that border on farms of mine and
indeed run into them. There are about them many points that tempt me, but
some equally important that repel me. The temptations are these. First,
to round off my estate would be in itself an improvement. Secondly, it
would be a pleasure, and a real economy to boot, to make one trip and
one expense serve for a visit to both properties, to keep both under
the same[1281] legal agent, indeed almost under the same stewards, and
to use only one of the granges as my furnished house, just keeping the
other in repair. I am taking into account the cost of furniture, of chief
servants, fancy gardeners, artisans, and even hunting[1282] outfit: for
it makes a vast difference whether items like these are concentrated in
one spot or are scattered in separate places. On the other hand I fear
it may be rash to expose so large a property to the same local climatic
risks. It seems safer to encounter the changes of fortune by not holding
too much land in one neighbourhood. Moreover, it is a very pleasant thing
to have change of scene and climate, and so too is the mere touring about
from one of your estates to another. Then comes the chief issue on which
I am trying to make up my mind. The farms are productive, the soil rich,
the water-supply good; they contain pastures, vineyards, and woodlands
that afford timber, from which there is a small but regular return. A
favoured land, you see: but it is suffering from the weakness[1283] of
those who farm it. For the late landlord several times distrained[1284]
on the tenants’ goods, lessening their arrears[1285] of rent for the
moment, but draining their substance for the future: the failure of this
sent up the arrears once more. So they will have to be equipped[1286]
with labour; which will cost all the more because only trusty slaves
will do. As for chained slaves, I never keep them on my estates, and in
those parts nobody does. I have now only to tell you the probable price.
It is three million sesterces, though at one time it was five million:
but, what with the present scarcity[1287] of tenants and the prevailing
agricultural depression, the returns from the farms have fallen, and
so has the market value. You will want to know whether I can raise
easily even the three millions. It is true that nearly all I have is
invested[1288] in land; still I have some money out at interest, and I
shall have no trouble in borrowing. I shall get it from my mother-in-law,
who lets me use her cash as if it were my own. So pray don’t let this
consideration influence you, provided the others do not gainsay my
project; I beg you to weigh them most carefully. For of experience and
foresight you have plenty and to spare as a guide in general business,
particularly in the placing of investments.’

The glimpses of agricultural conditions that we get from Pliny’s letters
do not as a rule give us a cheerful picture. Most of his land seems to
have been under vines, and the vintage[1289] was often poor, sometimes a
failure. Drought and hailstorms played havoc[1290] with the crops. When
there was a bountiful vintage, of course the wine made a poor price.
Hence the returns from the farms are small, and unsafe[1291] at that.
So he replies to similar complaints of friends. When he is at any of
his country places he generally has to face a chorus of grumbling[1292]
tenants. He was sometimes utterly puzzled what to do. If inclined to make
abatements[1293] of rent, he is uneasily aware that this remedy may only
put off the evil day. If tenants do not recover their solvency (and he
knows that they seldom do), he will have to change his policy[1294],
for they are ruining the land by bad husbandry. For himself, he is no
farmer. When on a country estate, watching the progress of the vintage,
he potters about[1295] in a rather purposeless manner, glad to retire to
his study where he can listen to his reader or dictate to his secretary:
if he can produce[1296] a few lines, that is his crop. It would seem that
not all his farms were let to tenants. In one letter he speaks of his
town-slaves[1297] being employed as overseers or gangers of the rustic
hands, and remarks that one of his occupations is to pay surprise visits
to these fellows. We can guess what a drag upon Italian agriculture the
slavery-system really was: here is a man full of considerate humanity,
devoted to the wellbeing of his slaves, who cannot trust one of them to
see that others do their work.

But that letting to tenants was his usual plan is evident from the
number of his references to the trouble they gave him. It was not always
clear whether to get rid of them or to keep them (and if the latter,
on what terms,) offered the less disastrous solution of an awkward
problem. In one letter[1298] he gives the following excuse for his
inability to be present in Rome on the occasion of a friend’s succeeding
to the consulship. ‘You won’t take it ill of me, particularly as I am
compelled[1299] to see to the letting of some farms, a business that
means making an arrangement for several years, and will drive me to adopt
a fresh policy. For in the five years[1300] just past the arrears have
grown, in spite of large abatements granted. Hence most (of the tenants)
take no further trouble to reduce their liabilities, having lost hope of
ever meeting them in full: they grab and use up everything that grows,
reckoning that henceforth it is not they[1301] who would profit by
economy. So as the evils increase I must find remedies to meet them. And
the only possible plan is to let these farms[1302] not at a cash rent but
on shares, and then to employ some of my staff as task-masters to watch
the crops. Besides, there is no fairer source of income than the returns
rendered by soil climate and season. True, this plan requires mighty
honesty, keen eyes, and a host of hands. Still I must make the trial;
I must act as in a chronic malady, and use every possible treatment to
promote a change.’

No doubt there were many landlords more effectively qualified to wring
an income out of rustic estates than this delicate and gentle literary
man. Indeed he knew this himself and made no secret of it. Writing to a
friend[1303] he says ‘When others go to visit their estates, it is to
come back the richer; when I do so, it is to come back the poorer for the
trip.’ He then tells the story of a recent experience. He had disposed of
the year’s vintage on some estate (evidently the hanging crop) by auction
to some speculative buyers, who were tempted by the apparent prospects
of a rise in price to follow. Things did not turn out as expected, and
Pliny felt bound to make some abatement in the covenanted price. Whether
this was simply owing to his own scrupulous love of fair dealing, or
whether some stipulation in the contract of sale had automatically become
operative, does not seem quite clear: I should give him the benefit of
the doubt. How to make the abatement equitably, so as to treat each case
with perfect fairness, was a difficult problem. For, as he shews at
length, the circumstances of different cases differed widely, and a mere
‘flat rate’ remission of so much per cent all round would not have worked
out so as to give equal relief to all. After careful calculation he
devised a scheme that satisfied his conscientious wish to act fairly by
each and all. Of course this left him a large sum out of pocket, but he
thought that the general approval of the neighbourhood and the gratitude
of the relieved speculators were well worth the money. For to have a good
name among the local dealers was good business for the future. Many an
honest gentleman since Pliny’s time has similarly consoled himself for
his losses of honour, and some of them have not missed their well-earned
recompense.

Among his many country properties, a certain Tuscan _villa_ was one
of his favourite resorts. In a long description of it and its various
attractions he mentions[1304] incidentally that the Tiber, which ran
right through the estate, was available for barges in winter and spring,
and thus enabled them to send their farm-produce by water-carriage to
Rome. This confirms the evidence of other writers, as does also the
letter describing the widespread devastation[1305] caused by a Tiber
flood. More notable as throwing light on conditions of life in rural
Italy is a letter[1306] in reply to a correspondent who had written to
inform him of the disappearance of a Roman of position and property when
on a journey, apparently in the Tiber country. The man was known to have
reached Ocriculum, but after that all trace of him was lost. Pliny had
small hopes from the inquiry that it was proposed to conduct. He cites
a similar case from his own acquaintance years before. A fellow-burgess
of Comum had got military promotion as centurion through the influence
of Pliny, who made him a present of money when he set out, apparently
for Rome, to take up his office. Nothing more was ever heard of him.
But Pliny adds that in this case, as in the one just reported, the
slaves escorting their master also disappeared. Therefore he leaves it
an open question, whether[1307] the slaves murdered their master and
escaped undetected, or whether the whole party on either occasion were
murdered by a robber band. The lack of a regular constabulary in Italy
had been, and still was, a grave defect in Roman administration. To
account for this neglect we must remember that rich men always relied on
their slave-escort for protection. If the poor man travelled, he was not
worth[1308] robbing; his danger was the chance of being kidnapped and
sold for a slave, and we have seen that some of the early emperors tried
to put down this abuse. The danger to a traveller from his own slaves was
perhaps greater on a journey than at home; but it was of the same kind,
inseparable from slavery, and was most cruelly dealt with by the law.
Meanwhile brigandage seems never to have been thoroughly extinguished in
Italy or the Provinces[1309].

In spite of these drawbacks to life and movement in a great slave-holding
community, there is nothing that strikes a reader more in Pliny’s
letters than the easy acceptance of present conditions. Under Trajan the
empire seemed so secure and strong, that unpleasant occurrences could
be regarded as only of local importance. That the free population of
Italy could no longer defend in arms what their forefathers had won, was
manifest. But custom was making it seem natural to rely on armies raised
in the Provinces; all the more so perhaps as emperors were being supplied
by Spain. That slavery itself was one of the cankers that were eating
out the vitality of the Roman empire, does not seem to have occurred to
Pliny or other writers of the day. Philosophers had got so far as to
protest against its worst abuses and vindicate the claims of a common
humanity. Christian apostles, in the circles reached by them, preached
also obedience[1310] and an honesty above eye-service as the virtues of a
slave. But in both of these contrasted doctrines the teachers were mainly
if not exclusively thinking of domestics, not of farm-hands. There was
however one imperial department in which the distinction between slave
and free still rigidly followed old traditional rules; and it was one
much more likely to have to deal with cases of rustic slaves than of
domestics. This was the army. The immemorial rule, that no slave could
be a soldier, had never been broken save under the pressure of a few
great temporary emergencies, or by the evasions incident to occasions
of civil warfare. It still remained in force. When Pliny was governor
of the Province of Bithynia and Pontus he had to deal with a question
arising out of this rule. Recruiting was in progress, and two slaves
were discovered among the men enlisted. They had already taken the
military oath, but were not yet embodied in any corps. Pliny reported
the case[1311] to Trajan, and asked for instructions. The emperor sent a
careful answer. ‘If they were called up (_lecti_), then the recruiting
officer did wrong: if they were furnished as substitutes[1312] (_vicarii
dati_), the fault is with those who sent them: but if they presented
themselves as volunteers, well knowing[1313] their disqualification, they
must be punished. That they are not as yet embodied, matters little. For
they were bound to have given a true account of their extraction on the
day when they came up for inspection.’ What came of it we do not know.
But it is no rash guess that the prospect of escaping into the ranks of
the army would be attractive[1314] to a sturdy rustic slave, and that
a recruiting officer might ask few questions when he saw a chance of
getting exceptionally fine recruits. Probably the two detected suffered
the capital penalty. Such was still the rigid attitude of the great
soldier-emperor, determined not to confess the overstraining of the
empire’s man-power. But the time was not far distant when Marcus, beset
by the great pestilence and at his wits’ end for an army of defence,
would enrol slaves[1315] and ruffians of any kind to fight for Rome.

It is not necessary to cite the numerous references in the letters to
slaves and slavery that are not connected with agriculture. Nor need
I pursue in detail the circumstances of one of his generous public
benefactions, the alimentary endowment[1316] for freeborn children,
probably at Comum. It has been mentioned in another chapter, and its
chief point of interest is in the elaborate machinery employed to secure
the perpetuity of the charity. To leave money to the municipality was
to risk its being squandered. To leave them land meant that the estate
would not be carefully managed. What he did was to convey[1317] the
property in some land to a representative of the burgesses, and to take
it back subject to a rent-charge considerably less than the yearly value
of the land. Thus the endowment was safe, for the margin allowed would
ensure that the land would not be allowed to drop out of cultivation. An
interesting glimpse of municipal patriotism, active and passive. The only
other detail I have to note is that he regularly uses the term _colonus_
as ‘tenant-farmer.’ I have not found a single instance of the older sense
‘tiller of the soil.’ We cannot argue from Pliny to his contemporaries
without some reserve, for he was undoubtedly an exceptional man. But, so
far as his evidence goes, it bears out the view that great landlords were
giving up the system of slave stewardships for free tenancies. Owners
there still were who kept their estates in hand, farming themselves or
by deputy for their own account. But that some of these were men of a
humbler class, freedmen to wit, we have seen reason to believe from
references in the elder Pliny. Perhaps they were many, and some may even
have worked with their own hands. Be this as it may, slave labour[1318]
was still the staple appliance of agriculture, and whenever there were
slaves for sale there were always buyers.


XLIV. SUETONIUS AND OTHERS.

=Suetonius=, whose Lives of the first twelve emperors contain much
interesting and important matter, stands in relation to the present
inquiry on the same footing as most of the regular historians. He
flourished in the times of Trajan and Hadrian, and therefore what remains
of his writings is not contemporary evidence. But he was a student and
a careful compiler from numerous works now lost. The number of passages
in which he refers to matters directly or indirectly bearing on rustic
life and labour is not large, and most of them have been cited in other
chapters, where they find a place in connexion with the context. He can
be dealt with very briefly here.

The close connexion between wars and the supply of slaves is marked
in the doings of Julius[1319] Caesar. Gaulish and British captives
were (as Caesar himself records) no small part of the booty won in his
northern campaigns. He rewarded his men after a victory with a prisoner
apiece: these would soon be sold to the dealers who followed the army,
and most of them would find their way to the Roman slave-market. To
gratify friendly princes or provincial communities, he sent them large
bodies of slaves as presents. So his victims served instead of cash
to win adherents for their new master. And these natives of the North
would certainly be used for heavy rough work, mostly as farm-hands.
When Augustus, loth to enlarge the empire, felt constrained to teach
restless tribes a lesson, he imposed a reserve-condition[1320] on the
sale of prisoners taken: they were not to be employed in districts near
their old homes, and not to be manumitted before thirty years. Most
of these would probably also be brought to Italy for the same kind of
service. Yet, as we have seen, there was kidnapping[1321] of freemen in
Italy; probably a sign that slaves were already become dear. That their
numbers had been reduced in the civil wars, not only by death but by
manumission, is fairly certain. In the war with Sextus Pompeius it was
found necessary[1322] to manumit 20,000 slaves to serve as oarsmen in the
fleet. Suetonius also records that Augustus when emperor had trouble with
the unwillingness of Romans to be called up for military duty. He had
to deal sharply[1323] with an _eques_ who cut off the thumbs of his two
sons to incapacitate them. The abuse of the public corn-doles was a grave
evil. Men got rid of the burden of maintaining old slaves by manumitting
them and so making them, as freedmen-citizens, entitled to a share of the
doles. This was shifting the burden of feeding useless mouths on to the
state. Augustus saw that the vast importation of corn for this bounty
tended to discourage[1324] Italian agriculture, and thought of abolishing
the whole system of _frumentationes_. But he had to give up the project,
being convinced that the system would be restored. He really desired to
revive agriculture, and it was surely with this aim that he advanced
capital sums[1325] to landlords free of interest on good security for
the principal. The growth of humane sentiment toward slaves is marked
by the ordinance of Claudius[1326] against some very cruel practices of
slaveowners. And we are reminded that penal servitude was now a regular
institution in the Roman empire by Nero’s order[1327] for bringing
prisoners from all parts to carry out some colossal works in Italy, and
for fixing condemnation to hard labour as the normal penalty of crime.

In the Lives of the three Flavian emperors there are one or two passages
of interest. At this distance of time it is not easy to appreciate the
effect on the sentiments of Roman society of the extinction of the
Julio-Claudian house, and the accession of a thoroughly plebeian one,
resting on the support of the army and readily accepted by the Provinces.
Suetonius, like Tacitus, was near enough to the revolutionary year 69 AD
to understand the momentous nature of the crises that brought Vespasian
to the head of affairs. He takes pains to describe[1328] the descent of
the new emperor from a Sabine family of no remarkable distinction. For
two generations they had combined with fair success the common Roman
professions of military service and finance. They were respectable
people of good local standing. But there was another story relative to a
generation further back. It was said that Vespasian’s greatgrandfather
(this takes us back to Republican days) had been a contractor[1329] for
rustic labour. He was a headman or ‘boss’ of working-parties such as
are wont to pass year after year from Umbria into the Sabine country
to serve as farm-labourers. Of this story Suetonius could not discover
any confirmation. But that there had been, and perhaps still was, some
such supply of migratory labour available, is a piece of evidence not
to be ignored. Vespasian himself was a soldier who steadily rose in the
usual official career till he reached the coveted post of governor of
Africa. After a term of honest but undistinguished rule, he came back
no richer than he went, indeed he was very nearly bankrupt. He was
driven to mortgage all his landed estate, and to become for a time a
slave-dealer[1330], in order to live in the style that his official rank
required. The implied disgrace of resorting to a gainful but socially
despised trade is at least evidence of the continual demand for human
chattels. Of two acts of Domitian[1331], his futile ordinance to check
vine-growing, and his grant of the remaining odd remnants of Italian land
to present occupants, enough has been said above.

It is not necessary to collect the numerous passages in writers of
this period that illustrate the growing change of view as to slavery
in general. The point made by moralists, that moral bondage is more
degrading than physical (for the latter need not be really degrading),
came with not less force from Epictetus the slave than from Seneca
the noble Roman. It is however worth while just to note the frequent
references to cases of philosophers and other distinguished literary men
who had either actually been slaves or had at some time in their lives
been forced to earn their daily bread by bodily labour. Such cases are,
Cleanthes[1332] drawing water for wages, Plautus[1333] hired by the baker
to grind at his mill, and Protagoras[1334] earning his living as a common
porter. In one passage several slaves[1335] are enumerated who became
philosophers. Now, what is the significance of these and other references
of the same import? I suggest that they have just the same bearing as
the general principles of common humanity argumentatively pressed by the
Stoic and other schools of thought. The sermonizing of Seneca is a good
specimen. But discussion of principles in the abstract was never the
strong point of Roman society, and citation of concrete instances would
serve to give reality to views that were only too often regarded as the
visionary speculations of chattering Greeks. That Roman authors, down
to the last age of Roman literature, expressed the longing for a more
wholesome state of agriculture by everlasting references to Cincinnatus
and the rest of the traditional rustic heroes, is another recognition
of this method. The notion that courage and contempt of death could be
fostered by the spectacle of gladiators rested on much the same basis.
True, there is nothing in the above considerations that directly bears
upon rustic labour as such: but hints that ‘a man’s a man for a’ that’
are not to be ignored when they make their appearance in the midst of a
slave-holding society.


XLV. APULEIUS.

The Province of Africa was in this period a flourishing part of the
empire, giving signs of its coming importance in the next generation,
when it produced several emperors. It was in fact a sort of successor of
Spain, and like Spain it enjoyed the advantage of not fronting on the
usual seats of war to the North and East. One of the most remarkable
literary figures of the age was the African[1336] =L Apuleius= of
Madaura, who travelled widely as student and lecturer, and was well
acquainted with Greece and Italy. A philosopher of the mystical-Platonist
type, he was in touch with practical life through his study of the Law,
and was for some time a pleader in Rome. His native Province[1337] was
notoriously addicted to litigation, and a modern scholar[1338] has shewn
that the works of Apuleius abound in legal phraseology and are coloured
with juristic notions. Now, it was not possible to go far in considering
property and rights without coming upon questions relative to land:
moreover, he himself owned land in Africa. Accordingly we find in him
some references to land, and even to rustic labour and conditions of
rural life. And, though his _Metamorphoses_ is a fantastic romance, there
is no reason to doubt that incidents and scenes (other than supernatural)
are true to facts observed by the writer, and therefore admissible as
evidence of a general kind. An instance may be found in the case of
the ass, that is the hero of the story transformed into that shape by
magic. He is to be sold, and the waggish auctioneer[1339] says to a
possible bidder ‘I am well aware that it is a criminal offence to sell
you a Roman citizen for a slave: but why not buy a good and trusty slave
that will serve you as a helper both at home and abroad?’ Here we have
a recognition of the fact of kidnapping, which is referred to elsewhere
in the book; that in cases of Roman victims the law took a very serious
view of the offence; while the point of the pleasantry lies in the
circumstance that neither auctioneer nor company present are aware that
the ass is a transformed man, liable to regain his human shape by magical
disenchantment.

The scene of the _Metamorphoses_ is laid in Greece, and the anecdotes
included in it do not give us a favourable picture of that part of
the Roman empire. There was surely nothing to tempt the writer to
misrepresent the condition of the country by packing his descriptions
with unreal details: he would thus have weakened the effect of his
romance. Wealth in the hands of a few, surrounded by a pauper majority;
shrunken towns, each with its more or less degraded rabble; general
insecurity for life liberty and property; a cruel and arbitrary use
of power; a spiritless acquiescence in this pitiful state of things,
relieved by the excitements of superstition and obscenity: such was
Roman Greece as Apuleius saw it. No doubt there was Roman Law to enforce
honesty and order. But the administration of justice seldom, if ever,
reaches the standard of legislation; and as yet the tendency of the Roman
government was to interfere as little as possible with local authorities.
Greece in particular had always been treated with special indulgence, in
recognition of her glorious past. Whether the effects of this favour were
conducive to the wellbeing of the country, may fairly be doubted. The
insane vanity of Nero, masquerading as Liberator of Greece, had surely
done more harm than good. Hadrian’s benefactions to Athens, dictated
by sentimental antiquarianism, could not improve the general condition
of the country, however satisfactory they might be to what was now an
University town living on students and tourists.

One of the first things that strikes a reader of this book is the
matter-of-fact way in which brigandage[1340] is taken for granted.
These robbers work in organized bands under chosen captains, have
regular strongholds as bases of operations, draw recruits from the
poverty-stricken peasantry or slaves, and do not hesitate to attack
and plunder great mansions, relying on the cowardice or indifference
(or perhaps treachery) of the rich owner’s slaves. Murder is to them
a mere trifle, and their ingenuity in torturing is fiendish. No doubt
their activities are somewhat exaggerated as a convenient part of the
machinery of the story, but the lament of Plutarch and the Euboic idyll
of Dion forbid us to regard these brigand-scenes as pure fiction.
They are another side of the same picture of distressful Greece. Nor
is the impression produced thereby at all weakened by a specimen of
military[1341] insolence. Greece was not a Province in which a large
army was kept, but all Governors had some armed force to support their
authority. The story introduces the ass with his present owner, a
gardener, on his back. They are met by a swaggering bully of a soldier,
who inquires where they are going. He asks this in Latin. The gardener
makes no reply, not knowing Latin. The angry soldier knocks him off the
ass, and repeats his question in Greek. On being told that they are
on their way to the nearest town, he seizes the ass on the pretext of
being wanted for fatigue duty in the service of the Governor, and will
listen to no entreaties. Just as he is preparing to break the gardener’s
skull, the gardener trips him up and pounds him to some purpose. He shams
dead, while the gardener hurries off and takes refuge with a friend in
the town. The soldier follows, and stirs up his mates, who induce the
local magistrates to take up the matter and give them satisfaction. The
gardener’s retreat is betrayed by a neighbour, and clever concealment
nullified by an indiscretion of the ass. The wretched gardener is found
and haled off to prison awaiting execution, while the soldier takes
possession of the ass. This story again is surely not grotesque and
incredible fiction. More likely it is made up from details heard by
the African during his sojourn in Greece. If scenes of this kind were
possible, the outlook of humble rustics[1342] can hardly have been a
cheerful one.

That perils of robbers and military insolence were not the only troubles
of the countryside, is shewn by the following anecdote[1343] describing
the brutal encroachments of a big landlord on poorer neighbours.
A landowner, apparently a man of moderate means, had three sons,
well-educated and well-behaved youths, who were close friends of a poor
man with a little cottage of his own. Bordering on this man’s little
holding was the large and fertile landed estate belonging to a rich and
powerful neighbour in the prime of life. This rich man, turning the fame
of his ancestors to bad account, strong in the support of party cliques,
in fact an autocrat[1344] within the jurisdiction of the town, was given
to making raids on the poverty of his humble neighbour. He slaughtered
his flocks, drove off his oxen, and trampled down his crops before they
were ripe, till he had robbed him of all the fruit of his thrift. His
next desire was to expel him altogether from his patch of soil: so he
got up a baseless dispute over boundaries, and claimed the whole of the
land as his own. The poor man, though diffident by nature, was bent upon
keeping his hereditary ground if only for his own burial. The claim
upset him greatly, and he entreated a number of his friends to attend at
the settlement[1345] of boundaries. Among those present were the three
brothers mentioned above, who came to do their little best in the cause
of their injured friend. But the rich man, unabashed by the presence
of a number of citizens, treated all efforts at conciliation with open
contempt, and swore that he would order his slaves to pick the poor man
up by the ears and chuck him ever so far from his cottage in less than
no time. The bystanders were greatly incensed at this brutal utterance.
One of the three brothers dared to say ‘It’s no good your bullying and
threatening like this just because you are a man of influence; don’t
forget that even poor[1346] men have found in the laws guarding freemen’s
rights a protector against the outrages of the rich.’ Upon this the
enraged tyrant let loose his ferocious dogs[1347] and set them on the
company. A horrible scene followed. One of the three youths was torn to
pieces, and the others also perished; one of them slain by the rich man
himself, the other, after avenging his brother, by his own hand.

The mere aggression of the rich landlord on the poor is interesting as
adding another instance of the encroachments to the occurrence of which
many other writers testify. The most remarkable feature of the story is
the insolent disregard of the Law shewn by the rich man from first to
last. That the governor of the Province could prevent or punish such
outrages, if his attention were called to them, is not to be doubted.
But he could not be everywhere at once, and it is not likely that many
of the poorer class would be forward to report such doings and appear
as accusers of influential persons. The rich probably sympathized with
their own class, and a poor man shrank from a criminal prosecution that
would in any event expose him to their vengeance afterwards. True, the
poor were the majority. But it was a very old principle of Roman policy
to entrust the effective control of municipalities to the burgesses of
property, men who had something to lose and who, being a minority, would
earn their local supremacy by a self-interested obedience to the central
government. Thus local magnates (their evil day was not yet come) were
left very much to their own devices, and most provincial governors cared
too much for their own ease and comfort to display an inquisitive zeal.
Moreover, so far as the rich thought it judicious to keep the poorer
contented, it would be the town rabble that profited chiefly if not
exclusively by their liberalities: the more isolated rustic was more
liable to suffer from their land-proud greediness. We must picture them
as overbearing and arbitrary slaveholders, practically uncontrolled; and
the worst specimens among them as an ever-present terror to a cowed and
indigent peasantry. We are not to suppose that things were as bad as this
in all parts of Greece, but that there was little or nothing to prevent
their becoming so, even in happier districts.

From time immemorial the Greek tendency had been to congregate in towns,
and after the early fall of the landowning aristocracies this tendency
was strengthened by democratic movements. The country as a whole was
never able to feed its population. But the population was now greatly
reduced. Given due security, perhaps the rustics might now have been able
to feed the towns. And that they were to some extent doing so may be
inferred from the fact that the chief peasant figure in the rural life
of the _Metamorphoses_ is the market-gardener[1348]. If he is but left
in peace, he seems to be doing fairly well. It is natural at this point
to inquire whether a _hortulanus_ might not also be a _colonus_, the
former name connoting his occupation and the latter his legal position in
relation to the land. Both terms often occur, but they seem to be quite
distinct: I can find nothing to justify the application of both to the
same person. And yet I cannot feel certain that Apuleius always means a
tenant-farmer[1349] under a landlord whenever he uses the word _colonus_.
Probably he does, as Norden seems to think. In any case the gardener is
evidently in a smaller way of business than the average _colonus_, and it
may be that his little scrap of land is his own. He certainly works[1350]
with his own hands, and I find nothing to suggest that he is an employer
of slaves, or that he himself is not free. That the tenant-farmers were
often _coloni partiarii_, bound to deliver to their landlord a fixed
share of their produce in kind, is highly probable. But this does not
exclude the payment of money rents as well. Local usage probably varied
in different districts. It is true that Apuleius several times[1351]
uses _partiarius_ metaphorically, but this only shews his addiction to
legal language, and is no proof of the prevalence of the share-system in
Greece. The _coloni_, nominally free, were as yet only bound to the soil
by the practical difficulty of clearing themselves from the obligations
that encumbered them and checked freedom of movement. But they were now
near to the time when they were made fixtures by law.

Another work of Apuleius furnishes matter of interest, the so-called
_Apologia_, a speech in his own defence when tried on a charge of
magical arts about the year 158 AD. That the accused was in no little
danger from this criminal prosecution has been shewn[1352] by Norden.
What concerns us is the reference to rustic affairs that the speaker
is led to make in the course of his argument, when demolishing some of
the allegations of his enemies. The trial was in Africa at the regular
provincial assize, and the conditions referred to are African. Apuleius,
as a man of note in his native Province, takes high ground to manifest
his confidence in the strength of his case. The prosecution want to draw
him into an unseemly squabble over side-issues. As the chief alleged
instance of his magic was connected with his marriage to a rich lady, a
widow of mature age, whom he was said to have bewitched, being at the
time a young man in need, it had evidently been thought necessary to
discuss his financial position as throwing light upon his motives. If
at the same time he could be represented as having acted in defiance of
well-known laws, so much the better. If we may trust the bold refutation
of Apuleius, they entangled themselves in a contradiction and betrayed
their own blind malice. His reply[1353] is as follows. ‘Whether you keep
slaves to cultivate your farm, or whether you have an arrangement with
your neighbours for exchange[1354] of labour, I do not know and do not
want to know. But you (profess to) know that at Oea, on the same day,
I manumitted three slaves: this was one of the things you laid to my
charge, and your counsel brought it up against me, though a moment before
he had said that when I came to Oea I had with me but a single slave.
Now, will you have the goodness to explain how, having but one, I could
manumit three,—unless this too is an effect of magic. Was there ever
such monstrous lying, whether from blindness or force of habit? He says,
Apuleius brought one slave with him to Oea. Then, after babbling a few
words, he adds that Apuleius manumitted three in one day at Oea. If he
had said that I brought with me three, and granted freedom to them all,
even that would not have deserved[1355] belief. But, suppose I had done
so, what then? would not three freedmen be as sure a mark of wealth as
three slaves of indigence?’

After this outburst the speaker is at pains to point out that to do
with few slaves is a philosopher’s part, commended by examples not of
philosophers only but of men famed in Roman history. The well-worn topic
of the schools, that to need little is true riches, is set forth at
large, with instances in illustration. He then asserts[1356] that he
inherited a considerable property from his father, which has been much
reduced by the cost of his journeys and expenses as a student and gifts
to deserving friends. After this he turns upon his adversary. ‘But you
and the men of your uneducated rustic class are worth just what your
property is worth and no more, like trees that bear no fruit and are
worth only the value of the timber in their stems. Henceforth you had
better not taunt any man with his poverty. Your father left you nothing
but a tiny farm at Zarat, and it is but the other day that you were
taking the opportunity of a shower of rain to give it a good ploughing
with the help of a single ass, and made it a three-days[1357] job. What
has kept you on your legs is the quite recent windfalls of inheritances
from kinsmen who died one after another.’ These personalities, in the
true vein of ancient advocacy, do not tell us much, but it is interesting
to note that the skilled pleader, a distinguished man of the world, quite
naturally sneers at his opponent for having been a poor working farmer.
Whether this was an especially effective taunt in the Province Africa,
the home of great estates, it is hardly possible to guess.

Of small farmers in Africa, working their own land, we have, probably by
accident, hardly any other record. But the reference above, to neighbours
taking turns to help one another on their farms, comes in so much as a
matter of course that we may perhaps conclude that there were such small
free farmers, at least in some parts of the Province. For slaves we need
no special evidence. But the lady whom Apuleius had married seems to
have been a large slaveowner as well as a large landowner. He declares
that he with difficulty persuaded her to quiet the claims of her sons by
making over to them a great part of her estate in land and other goods;
and one item consists[1358] of 400 slaves. We have also a reference to
_ergastula_ in a passage where he is protesting that to charge him with
practising magic arts with the privity of fifteen slaves is on the face
of it ridiculous[1359]. ‘Why, 15 free men make a community, 15 slaves
make a household, and 15 chained ones a lock-up.’ I take these _vincti_
to be troublesome slaves, not debtors. Again, in refuting the suggestion
that he had bewitched the lady, he states as proof of her sanity that
at the very time when she is said to have been out of her mind she most
intelligently audited and passed the accounts of her stewards[1360] and
other head-servants on her estates. And in general it has been well
said[1361] that Apuleius, with all his wide interest in all manner of
things, did not feel driven to inquire into the right or wrong of slavery
in itself. He took it as he found it in the Roman world of his day. That
he had eyes to see some of its most obvious horrors, may be inferred from
the description[1362] of the condition of slaves in a flour-mill, put
into the mouth of the man-ass. But with the humanitarian movements of
these times he shews no sympathy; and he can depict abominable scenes of
cruelty and bestiality without any warmth of serious indignation.




COMMODUS TO DIOCLETIAN


XLVI. GENERAL INTRODUCTION.

The death of Marcus Aurelius in 180 AD brings us to the beginning of a
long period of troubles, in which the growing weakness of the empire
was exposed, the principate-system of Augustus finally failed under the
predominance of military power, and the imperial government was left
to be reorganized by Diocletian on a more Oriental model. There is no
doubt that during some hundred years the internal wellbeing of the Roman
empire was being lowered, and that the parts most open to barbarian
invasion suffered terribly. But the pressure of taxation to supply
military needs bore heavily on all parts and impaired the vitality of the
whole. Reactions there were now and then, when a strong man, or even a
well-meaning one, became emperor and had a few years in which to combat
present evils and for the moment check them. But the average duration
of reigns was very brief; emperors were generally murdered or slain in
battle; from 249 to 283 the chief function of an emperor was to lead
his army against barbarian invaders. It is a remarkable fact that the
first half of this unhappy century was the classical period of Roman
jurisprudence. The important post of Praetorian Prefect, which began with
a dignified military command and was more and more becoming the chief
ministry of the Empire, was again and again held by eminent jurists. But
in the long run the civil power could not stand against the jealousy of
the military, and the murder of Ulpian in 228 practically ends the series
of great lawyer-ministers, leaving the sword in undisputed control. The
authorities for this century of troubles are meagre and unsatisfactory.
With the help of contemporary inscriptions, modern writers are able to
compose some sort of a history of the times, so far as public events and
governmental activities are concerned. But the literature of private
life, the source of our best evidence on agricultural labour, is for the
time at an end, and the facts of farm life were not of the kind thought
worthy of record in inscriptions.

There is therefore nothing to be done but to glean the few scraps of
information that in any way bear upon the condition of tillers of the
soil in this period. They are as a rule of little value, and they come
from writers of little authority. But it is something if they are of a
piece with the general record of these unhappy times. Even the imperial
biographies of Marius Maximus survive only in the meagre abstracts of
later writers, and modern historians are quite unable to reconstruct any
clear picture of the inner life of the period 180-284 AD owing to the
lack of materials.

The most significant piece of information relates to Pertinax. We are
told[1363] that one of the useful reforms contemplated by him was the
reclamation of waste lands throughout the empire. He ordained that any
one might occupy derelict lands, even on the imperial estates: on careful
cultivation thereof, the farmer was to become owner[1364]. For a space of
ten years he was to be exempt from all taxation, and his ownership was to
be guaranteed against future disturbance. This passage is good evidence
of the decay of agriculture, agreeing with what we have learnt from other
sources. But we cannot gather from it that the well-meant design had
any practical effect. Pertinax was only emperor for the inside of three
months, and could not realize his virtuous aspirations. About 80 years
later we find Aurelian[1365] planning the development of waste lands
in Etruria, and Probus[1366] giving allotments in the wilds of Isauria
to his veterans as settlers with obligation of military service. There
can be little doubt that the depopulation and decline of cultivation,
made sadly manifest in the calamitous times of Marcus Aurelius, had
never ceased to undermine the vital forces of the empire. How to fill up
deserted lands, and make them productive of food and revenue, was the
problem that every serious ruler had to face. And there was in fact only
one resource available to meet the need. The native population of the
empire, stationary at best, had been further reduced by pestilence and
famine, and was not able to fill up the spaces laid waste by frontier
wars. Hence the policy of bringing in masses of barbarians, adopted by
Marcus, had to be repeated again and again.

We must not confuse these settlements with the immigrations of conquering
tribes that occurred later. Rome was still superior to her adversaries
in military organization and skill, and under fairly equal conditions
able to defeat them in pitched battles. Thus Claudius II gained great
victories over the Goths, and the biographer[1367] tells us of the
sequel. ‘The Roman provinces were filled with barbarian slaves and
Scythian tillers of the soil. The Goth was turned into a settler on the
barbarian frontier. There was not a single district but had some Gothic
slave whose bondage attested the triumph.’ Here we seem to have the echo
of a somewhat boastful contemporary version. The mention of both slaves
and frontier colonists is to be noted. We have no statistics to guide us
in an attempt to estimate the relative numbers of the two classes. But
the settlement of defeated barbarians on the frontier as Roman subjects
is clearly regarded as a worthy achievement. So indeed it might have
been, had it been possible to civilize them as Romans, only profiting by
the introduction of new blood. But this process was no longer possible:
its opposite, the barbarizing of Roman lands, steadily went on. Claudius
only reigned about two years. The great soldier who followed him in
270-5, Aurelian, had a plan for employing prisoners of war[1368] on the
cultivation of waste lands in Italy itself, but we have no reason to
think that much came of it. And the true state of things was confessed
in his abandonment of Trajan’s great Province of Dacia. Aurelian
withdrew[1369] the army and the provincials, whom he settled south of the
Danube in Moesia; putting the best face he could on this retirement by
giving Moesia the name of Dacia.

These phenomena attest an obvious truth, sometimes ignored, that
territorial expansion needs something more than military conquest to
give it lasting effect. In order to hold conquered lands the conquerors
must either occupy them or thoroughly assimilate the native population.
Emperors in this period became aware that they could do neither.
Alexander Severus (222-35) gained a great victory[1370] over the Persians
and took a number of prisoners. It was a tradition of Persian kings not
to let their subjects pass into foreign slavery, and Alexander allowed
them to redeem these captives by a money payment. This he used partly in
compensating the masters of those who had already passed into private
ownership, and the rest he paid into the treasury. This conciliatory
policy may have been wise. In any case the treasury was in this age
chronically in need of ready money. But dealing with the great oriental
monarchy was a simpler undertaking than that of dealing with the rude
peoples of the North, who pressed on in tribal units, offering no central
power with which to negotiate. Probus (276-82) seems to have been sorely
troubled by their variety and independence of action. We hear that when
operating in Thrace he settled 100,000 Bastarnae[1371] on Roman soil,
and that all these kept faith with him. But he went on to transplant
large bodies of Gepidae Gruthungi and Vandals. These all broke their
faith. While Probus was busy putting down pretenders in other parts of
the empire, they went on raiding expeditions at large by land and sea,
defying and damaging the power of Rome. True, the emperor broke them by
force of arms, and drove the remnant back to their wilds: but we can
see what the biographer ignores, that such raids did mischief which the
empire was in no condition to repair. What were the terms made with
these barbarians, to which the Bastarnae faithfully adhered, we are not
told. Probably the grant of lands carried with it the duty of furnishing
recruits to Roman armies and accepting the command of Roman officers.

In connexion with agricultural conditions we must not omit to notice
the change that was passing over Roman armies. The straits to which
Marcus had been reduced by the years of plague and losses in the field
had compelled him to raise fresh troops by any means, enrolling slaves,
hiring barbarian mercenaries, and so forth. With this miscellaneous
force he just managed to hold his ground in the North. But the army
never recovered its old tone. The period 180-284 shews it going from
bad to worse. It is full of sectional jealousy and losing all sense
of common imperial duty; only effective when some one strong man
destroys his rivals and is for the moment supreme. The rise and fall
of pretenders[1372] is a main topic of the imperial history. As from
the foundation of the Empire, the numbers of the army were inadequate
for defence against simultaneous attacks on several frontiers. The lack
of cooperation among their enemies, and the mobility of Roman frontier
armies, had sufficed to keep invaders at bay. But as pressure became
more continuous it was more difficult to meet the needs of the moment
by moving armies to and fro. More and more they took on the character
of garrisons, their chief camps grew into towns, local recruits filled
up their ranks, and they were less and less available for service as
field-armies. But it was obviously necessary that the country round
about their quarters should be under cultivation, in order to supply
them with at least part of their food. It may safely be assumed that
this department was carefully attended to in the formation of all these
military stations. And it seems that under the new conditions one of the
evils that had hitherto embarrassed the empire was gradually brought to
an end. For the fact remains that, after all the wholesale waste of lives
in the bloody wars of the third century, it was still possible to raise
great and efficient armies. Reorganized by Diocletian and Constantine,
the empire proved able to defend itself for many years yet, even in the
West. The new system may have been oppressive to the civil population,
but it certainly revived military strength. This could not have been
achieved without an improvement in the supply of man-power. It has
been maintained[1373] that this improvement was due to the permanent
settlements of barbarians, mostly of German race, within the territories
of the empire during the third century. Whether planted on the vacant
lands as alien settlers (_inquilini_)[1374] on easy terms, but bound to
provide recruits for the army, or enlisted from the first and settled
in permanent stations, they were year by year raising large families and
turning deserted border-lands into nurseries of imperial soldiers. This
picture may be somewhat overdrawn, but it has the merit of accounting
for the phenomena. Without some explanation of the kind it is very hard
to understand how the empire came to survive at all. With it, the sequel
appears natural and intelligible. These barbarians were so far Romanized
as to be proud of becoming Romans: the empire was barbarized so far as to
lend itself to institutions of a more and more un-Roman character, and
to lose the remaining traditions of literature and art: and when ruder
barbarians in the fifth century assailed the empire in the West they
found the control of government already in the hands of kinsmen of their
own.

If we are to take the very meagre gleanings from the general records
of this period and combine them with the information gathered from the
African inscriptions referred to below, we can provisionally form some
sort of notion of the various classes of labour employed on the land.
First, there were _coloni_, freemen[1375] in the eye of the law, however
much local conditions, or the terms of their tenancies and the tendency
for tenancies to become hereditary, may have limited the practical use
of their legal freedom. Secondly, there were, at least in some parts,
protected occupants encouraged to turn to account parcels of land
that had for some reason or other lain idle. Thirdly, there were also
rustic slaves who did most of the work on large farms. The stipulated
services of tenants[1376] at certain seasons to some extent supplemented
their labour, at least in some parts: and the falling supply of slaves
tended to make such auxiliary services more important. For the value
of agricultural land depends mainly on the available supply of labour.
Fourthly, chiefly if not entirely in the northern Provinces, a number
of barbarians had been planted upon Roman soil. Some entered peacefully
and settled down as willing subjects of the empire on vacant lands
assigned to them. Some had surrendered after defeat in battle, and came
in as prisoners. But, instead of making them rustic slaves on the old
model, Marcus had found a new and better use for them. A new status,
that of _inquilini_[1377] or ‘alien denizens’ was created, inferior to
that of free _coloni_ but above that of slaves. They seem to have been
generally left to cultivate plots of land, paying a share of the produce,
and to have been attached to the soil, grouped under Roman landlords
or chief-tenants. They had their wives and families, and their sons
recruited Roman armies. Lastly, we have no right to assume that small
cultivating owners[1378] were wholly extinct, though there can hardly
have been many of them.

We have an account[1379] of the rising in Africa (238 AD) which, so
far as it goes, gives us a little light on the agricultural situation
there in the middle of this period. The barbarian emperor Maximin was
represented in the Province by a _procurator fisci_ whose oppressions
provoked a conspiracy against him. Some young men of good and wealthy
families drew together a number of persons who had suffered wrong. They
ordered their slaves[1380] from the farms to assemble with clubs and
axes. In obedience[1381] to their masters’ orders they gathered in the
town before daybreak, and formed a great mob. For Africa is naturally a
populous[1382] country; so the tillers of the soil were numerous. After
dawn the young leaders told the mass of the slaves to follow them as
being a section of the general throng: they were to conceal their weapons
for the present, but valiantly to resist any attack on their masters. The
latter then met the procurator and assassinated him. Hereupon his guards
drew their swords meaning to avenge the murder, but the countrymen in
support of their masters[1383] fell upon them with their rustic weapons
and easily routed them. After this the young leaders, having gone too
far to draw back, openly rebelled against Maximin and proclaimed the
proconsul Gordian Roman emperor. In this passage we have before us young
men of landlord families, apparently holding large estates and working
them with slave labour. They are evidently on good terms with their
slaves. Of tenant farmers there is no mention: but there is a general
reference to support given by other persons, already wronged or afraid
of suffering wrong. The Latin biographer[1384], who drew from Herodian,
speaks of the murder as the work of ‘the rustic common folk[1385] and
certain soldiers.’ Now Frontinus[1386], writing in the latter part of
the first century AD, tells us that in Africa on their great estates
individuals had ‘a considerable population[1387] of common folk.’
The language can hardly refer to slaves: and a reference to levying
recruits[1388] for the army plainly forbids such an interpretation. But
it does not imply that there were no slaves employed on those great
estates; the writer is not thinking of the free-or-slave labour question.
In regard to the writers who record this particular episode, are we to
suppose that by ‘slaves’ Herodian loosely means _coloni_? Surely not.
Then does Capitolinus by ‘rustic common folk’ mean slaves? I cannot
believe it. More probably the writer, contemporary with Diocletian and
Constantine, uses a loose expression without any precise meaning. If
we are to attempt any inference from the language of Herodian, we must
accept him as a witness that in Africa, or at least in parts of Africa,
agriculture was still being carried on by slave labour. This does not
exclude the existence of a small-tenancy system side by side with it. And
the state of things disclosed[1389] in the African inscriptions referred
to above is consistent with both systems: for that the manor-farm on
a great estate employed a slave staff for its regular operations, and
drew from tenants’ services only the help needed at certain seasons,
seems the only possible conclusion from the evidence. Therefore, while
agreeing with Heisterbergk[1390] that the narrative of Herodian shews the
populousness of Africa, we need not go so far as to ignore the fact of a
considerable farm-slave element in the Province.

Meanwhile there are signs that rural Italy was suffering from the
disorders and insecurity that had so often hindered the prosperity of
agriculture. Even under the strong reign of Severus, with a larger
standing army in Italy than ever before, a daring brigand[1391] remained
at large for two years and was only captured by treachery. Though we do
not hear of his attacking farmers directly, such a disturbance must have
been bad for all country folk. That he black-mailed them is probable:
that they were plundered and maltreated by the licentious soldiery
employed against him, is as nearly certain as can be from what we know of
the soldiery of this time.


XLVII. THE AFRICAN INSCRIPTIONS.

Certain inscriptions[1392] from the Roman Province of Africa, dating
from the second and third centuries AD or at least referring to matters
of that period, throw some light upon the management of great imperial
domains in that part of the world. To discuss these in full one by
one would be beyond the scope of this work, and would require several
chapters of intolerable length. I shall content myself with giving
a short account of each case, confined to those details which have
direct bearing on my subject and which can be gathered with reasonable
certainty from the often mutilated texts. French and German savants have
contributed freely to the deciphering and interpretation, with happy
results: but some of the proposed ‘restorations’ are much too bold to
serve as a basis for further argument. After the details, I purpose to
consider the points common to these interesting cases, and their place
in the history of agriculture and agricultural labour under the earlier
Roman Empire, say from Trajan to Severus.

(1) The inscription of Henschir Mettich[1393] belongs to the year 116-7
AD, at the end of Trajan’s reign. It deals with a domain called _fundus
villae magnae Variani_, and does not refer to it by the term _saltus_ at
all. There is no reference to arrears of rent, the _reliqua colonorum_
of which we often hear in the jurists and other writers. Indeed there
is no mention of money-rents, unless we reckon as such the little dues
(4 _as_ per head) payable for grazing stock on the common pasture. The
_coloni_ are _partiarii_, paying certain shares (generally ⅓) of their
yearly produce as rent. These are paid, not to an imperial official but
to the lords or head-tenants of the estate (_dominis aut conductoribus
eius fundi_) or to their stewards (_vilicis_). It seems certain therefore
that it was the chief tenants who were responsible to the imperial
treasury for the amounts annually due, and that upon them rested the
troublesome duty of collection. That this charge was a new one, laid
upon them by Trajan, is perhaps possible, but hardly probable. For this
statute regulating the domain (a _lex data_) is expressly declared to
be modelled on a _lex Manciana_[1394], which can hardly be other than a
set of regulations issued by a former owner of the estate, and adopted
with modifications by the imperial agents (_procuratores_) specially
appointed to organize it as an imperial domain. In Roman practice it was
usual to follow convenient precedents. How long the estate had become
Crown-property, and by what process, inheritance purchase confiscation
etc, we do not know. Nor is it certain whether the new statute was
prepared as a matter of course on the cessation of private ownership, or
whether it was issued in response to an appeal to the emperor complaining
of oppressive exactions on the part of the head-tenants. But of the
latter situation there is no sign, and I am inclined to accept the
former alternative. In that case it appears necessary to suppose that
the system of letting a great estate to one or a few great lessees, who
might and did sublet parcels to small tenant farmers, was not unknown
in the practice of great private landlords. This may well have been the
case in Africa, still populous and prosperous, though such a system never
took root in depopulated and failing Italy. It required willingness on
the part of men of substance to risk their capital in a speculation that
could only succeed if good sub-tenants were to be found. This condition
could not be fulfilled in Italy, but in Africa things were very different.

It is however easier to note this difference by unmistakeable signs
than to ascertain it in detail. One point is clear. The _coloni_ on
this domain were bound to render fixed services to the head-tenants
at certain seasons of the year. These services consisted of two days’
work (_operas binas_) at the times of ploughing hoeing and harvest, six
in all. The falling-off in the supply of slaves, despite occasional
captures of prisoners in war, was a consequence of the _pax Romana_, and
how to provide sufficient labour was a standing problem of agriculture.
The guarantee of extra labour at seasons of pressure was doubtless a
main consideration with speculators in inducing them to venture their
substance by becoming lessees of large tracts of land. Of hired labour
available for the purpose the statute gives no hint, nor is it likely
that such labourers were to be found in Africa. Thus the _colonus_, and
perhaps his whole household, were bound to certain compulsory services,
and thereby made part of an organization strictly regulated and liable to
further regulation. Further regulation was not likely to give the peasant
farmer more freedom of movement, since the leading motive of the system
was to secure continuous cultivation, and this could best be secured by
long tenancies, tending to become hereditary. Therefore this statute
offers various inducements to keep the peasant contentedly engaged in
bettering his own position by developing the estate. The head-tenants are
strictly forbidden to oppress him by exacting larger shares of produce
or more _operae_ than are allowed by the regulations. He is encouraged
to cultivate parcels of waste land, not included in his farm, by various
privileges: in particular, a term of rent-free years is guaranteed to him
in case he plants the land with fruit trees. This term, varying from five
to ten years according to species of trees, is meant to give him time to
get a taste of profit before he becomes liable to rent: its effect in
making him loth to move is obvious.

The statute tells us nothing on another important point. From the
jurists and other sources[1395] we know that in Italy it was normally
the custom for the stock of a farm let to a _colonus_ to be found for
the most part by the landlord. It was held[1396] that in taking over
this _instrumentum_ at a valuation the tenant virtually purchased it, of
course not paying for it in ready money, but standing bound to account
for the amount on quitting the tenancy. Thus a small man was left free
to employ his own little capital in the actual working of the farm. He
could add to the stock, and his additions gave to the landlord a further
security for his rent, over and above that given by the sureties usually
required. What stock was found by landlords, and what by tenant, was
a matter for agreement generally following local convention. But on
this African domain we are not told how the question of _instrumentum_
was settled. Probably there was a traditional rule so well established
that no reference to the point in the statute seemed necessary. The
sole landlord was now the emperor. Without some direct evidence to
that effect, I can hardly suppose that the provision of farm stock
was entrusted to his _procuratores_. On the other hand, if the chief
tenants, the _conductores_, were expected to undertake this business, as
if they had been landlords, this too seems to call for direct evidence.
Possibly the need of finding stock for an African peasant farmer was
not so pressing as in Italy: still some equipment was surely required.
How it was provided, seems to me a question for answering which we have
not as yet sufficient materials. But it may be that on these domains
the practical necessity for dealing with it seldom occurred. If, when
the formal term of a tenancy expired, the same tenant stayed on either
by tacit renewal (_reconductio_) or by grant of a new lease, the stock
originally supplied would surely remain for use on the farm, upkeep
and renewals of particular articles being of course allowed for. If a
farmer’s son succeeded him as tenant, the situation would be the same, or
very nearly so. Therefore the manifest desire of emperors to keep tenants
in permanence probably operated to minimize questions of _instrumentum_
to the point of practical insignificance.

That the _coloni_ on this estate were themselves handworkers can
hardly be doubted. The _operae_ required of them suggest this on any
natural interpretation. But there is nothing to shew that they did not
employ[1397] slave labour—if and when they could get it. We are not
to assume that they were all on one dead level of poverty. That the
head-tenants kept slaves to work those parts of the domain that they
farmed for their own account, is indicated by the mention of their
_vilici_, and made certain by the small amount of supplementary labour
guaranteed them in the form of tenants’ _operae_. Only one direct mention
of slaves (_servis dominicis_) occurs in the inscription, and the text
is in that place badly mutilated. Partly for the same defect, it seems
necessary to avoid discussing certain other details, such as the position
of the _stipendiarii_ of whom we hear in a broken passage. Nor do I
venture to draw confident inferences from the references to _inquilini_
or _coloni inquilini_, or to discover an important distinction between
the tenants who actually resided on the estate and those who did not.
It may be right to infer a class of small proprietors dwelling around
on the skirts of the great domain and hiring parcels of land within it.
It may be right to regard the _inquilini_ as _coloni_ transplanted from
abroad and made residents on the estate. But until such conclusions are
more surely established it is safer to refrain from building upon them.
The general effect of this document is to give us outlines of a system
of imperial ‘peculiars,’ that is of domains on which order and security,
necessary for the successful working and continuous cultivation, were not
left to the operation of the ordinary law, but guaranteed in each case by
what we may call an imperial by-law.

(2) The inscription of Souk el Khmis[1398] deals with circumstances
between 180 and 183 AD. The rescript of Commodus, and the appeal to which
it was the answer, are recorded in it. The imperial estate to which it
refers is called _saltus Burunitanus_. A single _conductor_ appears to
have been the lessee of the whole estate, and it was against his unlawful
exactions that the _coloni_ appealed. Through the connivance of the
responsible _procurator_ (corruptly obtained, the _coloni_ hint,) this
tyrant had compelled them to pay larger shares of produce than were
rightly due, and also to render services of men and beasts beyond the
amount fixed by statute. This abuse had existed on the estate for some
time, but the proceedings of the present _conductor_ had made it past all
bearing. Evidently there had been some resistance, but official favour
had enabled him to employ military force in suppressing it. Violence
had been freely used: some persons had been arrested and imprisoned or
otherwise maltreated; others had been severely beaten, among them even
Roman citizens. Hence the appeal. It is to be noted that the appellants
in no way dispute their liability to pay shares of produce (_partes
agrarias_) or to render labour-services at the usual seasons of pressure
(_operarum praebitionem iugorumve_). They refer to a clause in a _lex
Hadriana_, regulating these dues. It is against the exaction of more
than this statute allows that they venture to protest. They judiciously
point out to the emperor that such doings are injurious to the financial
interest[1399] of his treasury (_in perniciem rationum tuarum_), that
is, they will end by ruining the estate as a source of steady revenue.
The officials of the central department in Rome were evidently of the
same opinion, for the rescript of Commodus[1400] plainly ordered his
_procuratores_ to follow closely the rules and policy applicable to
the domains, permitting no exactions in transgression of the standing
regulations (_contra perpetuam formam_). In short, he reaffirmed the
statute of Hadrian.

In this document also we hear nothing of tenants’ arrears or of
money-rents. Naturally enough, for the _coloni_ are _partiarii_
whose rent is a share of produce. In connexion with such tenants the
difficulty[1401] of _reliqua_ does not easily arise. They are labouring
peasants, who describe themselves as _homines rustici tenues manuum
nostrarum operis victum tolerantes_. Of course they are posing as
injured innocents. Perhaps they were: at any rate the great officials
in Rome would look kindly on humble peasants who only asked protection
in order to go on unmolested, producing the food which it was their
duty to produce,—food, by the by, of the need of which the Roman mob
was a standing reminder. Of _vilici_ or ordinary slaves this document
says nothing, for it had no need to do so; but the right to _operae_
at certain seasons implies slave labour on the head-tenant’s own farm,
probably attached to the chief _villa_ or _palatium_. In a notable
phrase at the end of their appeal the _coloni_ speak of themselves[1402]
as ‘your peasants, home-bred slaves and foster-children of your
domains’ (_rustici tui vernulae et alumni saltuum tuorum_). Surely this
implies, not only that they are _coloni Caesaris_, standing in a direct
relation to the emperor whose protection[1403] they implore against the
_conductores agrorum fiscalium_; but also that their connexion with
the estate is an old-established one, passing from fathers to sons, a
hereditary tie which they have at present no wish to see broken.

In this case the circumstances that led to the setting-up of the
inscription are clear enough. Evidently the appeal represented a great
effort, both in the way of organizing concerted action on the part of the
peasant farmers, and in overcoming the hindrances to its presentation
which would be created by the interested ingenuity of those whose acts
were thereby called in question. The imperial officials in the Provinces
were often secretly in league with those in authority at Rome, and to
have procured an imperial rescript in favour of the appellants was a
great triumph, perhaps a rare one. The _forma perpetua_ containing the
regulations governing the estate was, we learn, already posted up on
a bronze tablet. It had been disregarded: and now it was an obvious
precaution to record that the emperor had ordered those regulations to be
observed in future. How long the effect of this rescript lasted we are
left to guess. Officials changed, and reaffirmation of principles could
not guarantee permanent reform of practice. Still, the policy of the
central bureau, when not warped by corrupt influence, was consistent and
clear. To keep these imperial ‘peculiars’ on such a footing as to insure
steady returns was an undoubted need: and, after the extreme strain on
the resources of the empire imposed by the calamitous times of Marcus, it
was in the reign of Commodus a greater need than ever.

(3) The Gazr Mezuâr inscription[1404], very fragmentary and in some
points variously interpreted, belongs to the same period (181 AD). A
few details seem sufficiently certain to be of use here. The estate in
question is imperial property, apparently one of the domanial units
revealed to us by these African documents. It seems to record another
case of appeal against unlawful exaction of _operae_, probably by a
_conductor_ or _conductores_. It also was successful. But it is notable
that the lawful amount of _operae_ to be rendered by _coloni_ on this
estate was just double of that fixed in the other cases—four at each
of the seasons of pressure, twelve in all. We can only infer that the
task-scale varied on various estates for reasons unknown to us. One
fragment, if a probable restoration[1405] is to be accepted, conveys
the impression of a despairing threat on the part of the appellants. It
suggests that on failure of redress they may be driven to return to their
homes where they can make their abode in freedom. On the face of it, this
is an assertion of freedom of movement, a valuable piece of evidence, if
it can be trusted. We may safely go so far as to note that it is at least
not inconsistent with other indications pointing to the same conclusion.
We may even remark that the suggestion of going home in search of freedom
agrees better with the notion that these _coloni_ were African natives
than with the supposition of their Italian origin. The Roman citizens
on the Burunitan estate will not support the latter view, for they are
mentioned as exceptional. Seeck (rightly, I think,) urges that Italy was
in sore need of men and had none to spare for populous Africa. I would
add that the emigration of Italians to the Provinces as working farmers
seems to require more proof than has yet been produced. As officials,
as traders, as financiers and petty usurers, as exploiters of other
men’s labour, they abounded in the subject countries; but, so far as I
can learn, not as labourers. Many of them no doubt held landed estates,
for instance in the southern parts of Spain and Gaul. But when we meet
with loose general expressions[1406] such as ‘The Roman is dwelling in
every land that he has conquered,’ we must not let them tempt us into
overestimating the number of Italian settlers taking an active part in
the operations of provincial agriculture.

(4) The inscription of Ain Ouassel[1407] belongs to the end of the
reign of Severus. The text is much broken, but information of no small
importance can be gathered from what remains. Severus was himself a
native of Africa, and may have taken a personal interest in the subject
of this ordinance. In point of form the document chiefly consists of a
quoted communication (_sermo_) from the emperor’s _procuratores_[1408],
one of whom, a freedman, saw to its publication in an inscription on an
_ara legis divi Hadriani_. A copy of the _lex Hadriana_, or at least
the relevant clauses thereof, was included. The matter on which the
emperor’s decision is announced was the question of the right to occupy
and cultivate rough lands (_rudes agri_)[1409], which are defined as
lands either simply waste or such as the _conductores_ have neglected
to cultivate for at least ten years preceding. These lands are included
in no less than five different _saltus_ mentioned by proper names, and
the scope of the ordinance is wider than in the cases referred to above.
It appears that, while it may have contained some modifications or
extensions of the provisions of the _lex Hadriana_, its main bearing was
to reaffirm and apply the privileges granted by that statute. It is not
rash to infer that we have here evidence of a set of regulations for all
or many of the African domains, forming a part of Hadrian’s great work of
reorganization.

If the remaining words of this inscription are rightly interpreted,
as I think they are, it seems that the policy of encouraging the
cultivation of waste and derelict lands was at this time being revived
by the government. We have seen it at work in Trajan’s time, promoted by
guarantee of privileges and temporary exemption from burdens. But the
persons then encouraged to undertake the work of reclamation were to all
appearance only the _coloni_ at the time resident on the estate. In the
case of these five _saltus_, the offer seems to be made more widely,
at least so far as the remaining text may justify such conclusions. It
reads like an attempt to attract enterprising squatters of any kind from
any quarter. They are offered not merely undisturbed occupation and a
heritable tenure of some sort, but actual _possessio_. Now this right,
which fills a whole important chapter in Roman law, was one protected by
special legal remedies, and even on an imperial domain can hardly have
been a matter of indifference. It was quite distinct from mere _possessio
naturalis_[1410], which was all that the ordinary _colonus_ enjoyed on
his own behalf. This new-type squatter is allowed the same privilege of
so many years of grace, free of rent, at the outset of his enterprise,
that we have noted above. The details are somewhat different. For olives
the free term is ten years: for fruit trees (_poma_, here mentioned
without reference to vines) it is seven years. It is expressly provided
that the _divisio_, which implies the partiary system of tenancy, shall
apply only to such _poma_ as are actually brought[1411] to market. This
suggests that in the past attempts to levy the quota as a proportional
share of the gross crop, without regard to the needs of the grower’s
own household, had been found to discourage reclamation. It has been
pointed out that the effect of the new policy would be to create a
sort of perpetual leasehold, similar to that known by the Greek term
_emphyteusis_, which is found fully established in the later empire.
But the land was not all under fruit-crops. The disposal of corn crops
is regulated in a singular clause thus. ‘Any shares of dry[1412] crops
that shall be due are, during the first five years of occupation, to be
delivered to the head-tenant within whose holding[1413] the land occupied
is situate. After the lapse of that time they are to go to the account
(of the Treasury[1414]).’ Why is the _conductor_ to receive these _partes
aridae_? It is reasonably suggested that the intention was to obviate
initial obstruction on the part of the big lessee, and thus to give the
reclamation-project a fair start.

For we have no right to assume that the parcels of land thrown open to
occupation had hitherto been included[1415] in no tenancy. The whole
import of the document shews that they often belonged to this or that
area held by one or other of the big lessees. That there was at least one
_conductor_ to each of the five _saltus_ seems certain. That there was
only one to each, is perhaps probable, but hardly to be gathered from
the text. Now, so long as the _conductor_ regularly paid his fixed rent
(_canon_) and accounted for the taxes (_tributa_) due from the estate,
why should the imperial authority step in to take pieces of land (and
that the poorest land) out of his direct control? The answer to this is
that the Roman law[1416] recognized the right of a private landlord to
require of his tenants that they should not ‘let down’ the land leased to
them: and proof of neglected cultivation might operate to bar a tenant’s
claim for abatement of rent. What was the right of an ordinary landlord
was not likely to be waived by an emperor: though his domains might be
administered in fact by a special set of fiscal regulations, he claimed
a right analogous to that recognized by the ordinary law, and none could
challenge its exercise. A big lessee might often find that parts of his
holding could not be cultivated at a profit under existing conditions.
Slave labour was careless and inefficient; it was in these times also
costly, so costly that it only paid to employ it on generous soils.
The task-work of _coloni_ did not amount to much, and it was no doubt
rendered grudgingly. He was tempted to economize in slaves[1417] and to
employ his reduced staff on the best land only. We need not suppose that
he got an abatement of his fixed rent from the fiscal authorities: he
was most unlikely to attract their attention by making such a claim. He
had made his bargain with eyes presumably open. That he had agreed to
the _canon_ assures us that it must have been low enough to leave him a
comfortable margin for profit. We may be fairly sure that he sat quiet
and did what seemed to pay him best.

In the remaining text of this statute there is no reference to _operae_
due from the new squatters, and nothing is said of _coloni_. This
does not seem to be due to injury of the stone. The persons for whose
benefit the statute is enacted are apparently a new or newly recognized
element[1418] in the population of these domains, not _coloni_. But
the rights offered to them are expressly referred to as rights granted
by the statute of Hadrian. If so, then the _lex Hadriana_ contemplated
the establishment of a new peasant class, not _coloni_, and the present
statute was merely a revival of Hadrian’s scheme. The men are eventually
to pay shares of crops, and Schulten’s[1419] view, that they are on the
way to become _coloni_, is possible, if not probable. When he remarks
that they might find the position of _coloni_ a doubtful boon, we need
not challenge his opinion.

(5) The inscription of Ain el Djemala[1420], a later discovery (1906)
is of special importance as belonging to the same neighbourhood as the
preceding one. It is a document of Hadrian’s time. It refers to the same
group of estates as the above, and deals with the same matter, the right
to cultivate waste or derelict parcels of land. Indeed the connexion of
the two inscriptions is so close that the parts preserved of each can
be safely used to fill gaps in the text of the other. In a few points
this inscription, the earlier in date, supplies further detail. The
most notable is that another estate, a _saltus_ or _fundus Neronianus_,
is mentioned in it, and not in the later one. Thus it would seem that
it referred to six estates, a curious coincidence, when we recall the
six great African landlords made away with by Nero. Another little
addition is that waste lands are defined as marshy or wooded. Also that
the land is spoken of as fit for growing olives vines and corn-crops,
which supplements a mutilated portion of the Ain Ouassel stone. But in
one point the difference between the two is on the face of it difficult
to reconcile. In addressing the imperial _procuratores_ the applicants
base their request on the _lex Manciana_, the benefit of which they
seek to enjoy[1421] as used on the neighbouring _saltus Neronianus_.
Here the broken text is thought to have contained a reference to the
enhanced prosperity of that estate owing to the concession. In any case
we may fairly conclude that the _lex Manciana_ was well known in the
district, and its regulations regarded by the farmers as favourable to
their interests. But the reply to their petition does not refer to it as
the immediate basis of the decision given. The communication (_sermo_)
of Hadrian’s procurators is cited as the ground of the leave granted
for cultivation of waste lands. Yet the broken sentence at the end
of the inscription seems at least to shew that the rules of the _lex
Manciana_ were still recognized as a standard, confirmed and perhaps
incorporated, or referred to by name, in the _lex Hadriana_ itself.
It is ingeniously suggested that the farmers rest their case on the
_Manciana_ because the _Hadriana_ was as yet unknown to them; while the
reply refers to Hadrian’s statute as authority. Whether the _saltus_ or
_fundus Neronianus_, on which the Mancian regulations were in force, is
another estate-unit similar to the five named both here and in the later
inscription, is a point on which I have some doubts, too little connected
with my subject for discussion here. The general scope of the concession
granted by Hadrian is the same as the later one of Severus.

If Hadrian issued a statute or statutes regulating the terms of occupancy
on the African domains, and some attempts to evade it were met by its
reaffirmation under Commodus, it is quite natural that neglect or
evasion of it in some other respects should be met by reaffirmation
under Severus. This consideration will account for the identity of the
concessions granted in these two inscriptions. And it agrees perfectly
with the evidence of later legislation in the Theodosian code. The
normal course of events is, legislation to protect the poorer classes
of cultivators, then evasion of the law by the selfish rich, then
reenactment of evaded laws, generally with increased penalties. That
under the administrative system of the domains much the same phenomena
should occur, is only what we might expect.


XLVIII. DISCUSSION OF THE ABOVE INSCRIPTIONS.

In reviewing the state of things revealed to us by these inscriptions
we must carefully bear in mind that they relate solely to the Province
Africa. Conditions there were in many ways exceptional. When Rome took
over this territory after the destruction of Carthage in 146 BC, it was
probably a country divided for the most part into great estates worked
on the Carthaginian system by slave labour. Gradually the land came more
and more into the hands of Roman capitalists, to whose opulence Horace
refers. Pliny tells us that in Nero’s time six[1422] great landlords
possessed half the entire area of the Province, when that emperor found
a pretext for putting them to death and confiscating their estates.
Henceforth the ruling emperor was the predominating landlord[1423] in
a Province of immense importance, in particular as a chief granary of
Rome. We are not to suppose that any change in the system of large units
was ever contemplated. Punic traditions, probably based on experience,
favoured the system; though the Punic language, still spoken, seems to
have been chiefly confined to the seaboard districts. What the change
of lordship effected was not only to the financial advantage of the
imperial treasury: it also put an end to the creation of what were a sort
of little principalities that might some day cause serious trouble. At
this point we are tempted to wonder whether the great landlords, before
the sweeping measure of Nero, had taken any steps towards introducing a
new organization in the management of their estates. Trajan’s statute
refers to a _lex Manciana_ and adopts a number of its regulations. These
regulations clearly contemplate a system of head-tenants and sub-tenants,
of whom the latter seem to be actual working farmers living of the labour
of their own hands, as those who some 65 years later described themselves
in appealing to Commodus. The former have stewards in charge of the
cultivation of the ‘manor farms’ attached to the principal farmsteads,
and evidently employ gangs of slaves: but at special seasons have a
right to a limited amount[1424] of task-labour from the free sub-tenants
of the small farms. That these labour-conditions were devised to meet a
difficulty in procuring enough slaves to carry on the cultivation of the
whole big estate, is an inference hardly to be resisted. That we find it
on more than one estate indicates that for the time it was serving its
purpose. But, in admitting that it probably began under the rule of great
private landlords, we must not lose sight of the fact that it was liable
to grievous abuse, and that even the regulations of Hadrian did not
remove the necessity of pitiful appeals for redress.

An important characteristic of these estates was that they were outside
the municipal[1425] system. Each of the so-called _civitates_ had
its own charter or statute (_lex_) conforming more or less closely
to a common[1426] model, under which the municipal authorities could
regulate the management of lands within its territory. But these great
estates were independent[1427] of such local jurisdictions. And this
independence would seem to date from the times of private ownership,
before the conversion of many of them into imperial domains. Mommsen
thought that this separate treatment of them as ‘peculiars’ began in
Italy under the Republic, and was due to the influence of the landowning
aristocracy, who were bent upon admitting no such concurrent authority
on their _latifundia_. This may have been so, and the extension of
large-scale possessions to the Provinces may have carried the system
abroad. At all events there it was, and it suited the convenience of
a grasping emperor: he had only to get rid of the present possessor
and carry on the administration of the domain as before: his agents
stepped into the place of those employed by the late landlord, and only
slight modification of the current regulations would be required. He
issued a statute for management of ‘crown-property’ as he would for
a municipality. It was in effect a local law, and it does not appear
that the common law administered by the ordinary courts could override
it. The imperial _procurator_ was practically the magistrate charged
with its administration in addition to his financial duties, for
government and extraction of revenue were really two sides of the same
function. Obviously the interests of the emperor, of his agent, of the
head-tenants, and of the peasant cultivators, were not the same. But the
peasant, who wanted to pay as little as possible, and the emperor who
wanted to receive steady returns—as large as possible, but above all
things steady—had a common interest in preventing unlawful exactions, by
which a stable income was imperilled and the prosperity of the cultivator
impaired. On the other hand the _procurator_ and the _conductor_ could
only make illicit profits through combining to rob the emperor by
squeezing his _coloni_. How to accomplish this was no doubt a matter
of delicate calculation. How much oppression would the _coloni_ stand
without resorting to the troublesome and risky process of an appeal? We
only hear of one or two appeals made with success. Of those that were
made and rejected or foiled by various arts, and of those abandoned in
despair at an early stage, we get no record. Yet that such cases did
occur, perhaps not seldom, we may be reasonably sure.

It is well to remember that Columella, in whose treatise letting of
farms to tenants first appears, not as an occasional expedient but as
part of a reasoned scheme of estate-management, makes provision for a
_procurator_[1428] as well as a _vilicus_. One duty of the former is
to keep an eye on the latter. In the management of great estates an
atmosphere of mistrust is perhaps to some extent unavoidable. In an
agricultural system based on slave labour, this mistrust begins at the
very bottom of the structure and reaches to the very top, as is shewn
by all experience ancient and modern. Industry in slaves, diligence
and honesty in agents and stewards, are not to be relied on when these
subordinates have no share in the profit derived from the practice
of such virtues. And mistrust of slaves and freedmen did not imply a
simple trust in free tenants. Columella only advises[1429] letting
to tenants in circumstances that make it impracticable to cultivate
profitably by a slave-staff under a steward. The plan is a sort of last
resort, and it can only work well if the tenants stay on continuously.
Therefore care should be taken to make the position of the _coloni_
permanently attractive. This advice is primarily designed for Italy,
but its principles are of general application, and no doubt justified
by experience. Their extension to _latifundia_ abroad, coupled with
a falling-off in the supply of slaves, led to similar results: great
estates might still be in part worked by slave labour under stewards, but
letting parcels to small tenants became a more and more vital feature of
the system. But to deal directly from a distance with a number of such
peasant farmers would be a troublesome business. We need not wonder that
it became customary to let large blocks of land, even whole _latifundia_,
to big lessees, speculative men who undertook the subletting and
rent-collecting of part of their holdings, while they could work
the central manor-farm by slave labour on their own account, and
generally exploit the situation for their own profit. Thus, as once the
_latifundium_ had absorbed little properties, so now its subdivision was
generating little tenancies, with chief-tenants as a sort of middlemen
between the _dominus_ and the _coloni_. To protect the _colonus_, the
powers of the _conductor_[1430] had to be strictly limited: to ease the
labour-problem and retain the _conductor_, a certain amount of task-work
had to be required of the _colonus_. And this last condition was ominous
of the coming serfdom.

If the economic situation and the convenience of non-resident landlords
operated to produce a widespread system of letting to small tenants, it
was naturally an object to levy the rents in such a form as would best
secure a safe and regular return. To exact a fixed money-rent would mean
that the peasant must spend time in marketing his produce in order to
procure the necessary cash, and thereby lessen the time spent in actual
farm-labour. In bad years he would look for an abatement of his rent,
nor would it be easy to satisfy him: here was material for disputes and
discontent. Such difficulties were known in Italy and elsewhere, and
jurists recognized[1431] an advantage of the ‘partiary’ system in this
connexion. An abatement of rent due in a particular year need not imply
that the landlord lost the amount of abatement for good and all. If the
next year produced a ‘bumper’ crop, the landlord was entitled to claim
restitution of last year’s abatement in addition to the yearly rent. This
too, it seems, in the case of a tenant sitting at a fixed money-rent. But
the _partiarius colonus_ is on another footing: he shares gain and loss
with the _dominus_, with whom he is a quasi-partner[1432]. It was surely
considerations of this kind that led to the adoption of the share-rent
system on these great African estates. By fixing the proportion on a
moderate scale, the peasant was fairly certain to be able to pay his
rent, and he would not be harassed with money transactions dependent on
the fluctuations in the price of corn. Under such conditions he was more
likely to be contented and to stay on where he was, and that this should
be so was precisely what the landlord desired. On the other hand the big
_conductor_ might pay rent either in coin or kind. He was a speculator,
doubtless well able to take care of his own interests: probably the
normal case was that he agreed to a fixed cash payment, and only took the
lease on terms that left him a good prospect of making it a remunerative
venture. But on this point there is need of further evidence.

When the emperor took over an estate of this kind, such an existing
organization would be admirably fitted to continue under the fiscal
administration. Apparently this is just what happened. One small but
important improvement would be automatically produced by the change. The
_coloni_ would now become _coloni Caesaris_[1433] and whatever protection
against exactions of _conductores_ they may have enjoyed under the sway
of their former lords was henceforth not less likely to be granted and
much more certain of effect. To the fiscal officials any course of action
tending to encourage permanent tenancies and steady returns would on
the face of it be welcome: for it was likely to save them trouble, if
not to bring them credit. The only influence liable to incline them in
another direction was corruption in some form or other, leading them
to connive at misdeeds of the local agents secretly in league with the
head-lessees on the spot. That cases of such connivance occurred in the
period from Trajan to Severus is not to be doubted. During the following
period of confusion they probably became frequent. But it was not until
Diocletian introduced a more elaborate imperial system, and increased
imperial burdens to defray its greater cost, that the evil reached its
height. Then the corruption of officials tainted all departments, and
was the canker ever gnawing at the vital forces of the empire. But that
this deadly corruption was a sudden growth out of an existing purity is
not to be imagined. All this is merely an illustration of that oldest
of political truisms, that to keep practice conformable to principle is
supremely difficult. The only power that seems to be of any effect in
checking the decay of departmental virtue is the power of public opinion.
Now a real public opinion cannot be said to have existed in the Roman
Empire; and, had it existed, there was no organ through which it could
be expressed. And the Head of the State, let him be ever so devoted to
the common weal, was too overburdened with manifold responsibilities to
be able to give personal attention to each complaint and prescribe an
equitable remedy.

How far we are entitled to trace a movement of policy by the contents of
these African inscriptions is doubtful. They are too few, and too much
alike. Perhaps we may venture to detect a real step onward in the latest
of them. The renewal of the encouragement of squatter-settlers[1434] on
derelict lands does surely point to a growing consciousness that the
food-question was becoming a more and more serious one. Perhaps it may be
taken to suggest that the system of leasing the African domains to big
_conductores_ had lately been found failing in efficiency. But it is
rash to infer much from a single case: and the African Severus may have
followed an exceptional policy in his native province. It is when we look
back from the times of the later Empire, with its frantic legislation to
bind _coloni_ to the soil, and to enforce the cultivation of every patch
of arable ground, that we are tempted to detect in every record symptoms
of the coming constraint. As yet the central government had not laid
its cramping and sterilizing hand on every part of its vast dominions.
Moreover the demands on African productivity had not yet reached their
extreme limit. There was as yet no Constantinople, and Egypt still shared
with Africa the function of supplying food to Rome. Thus it is probably
reasonable to believe that the condition of the working tenant-farmers
was in this age a tolerable[1435] one. If those on the great domains
were bit by bit bound to their holdings, it was probably with their own
consent, so far at least that, seeing no better alternative, they became
stationary and more or less dependent peasants. In other parts of Africa,
for instance near Carthage, we hear of wealthy landowners employing
bodies of slaves. Some of these men may well have been Italians: at least
they took a leading part later in the rising against Maximin and the
elevation of Gordian.

In connexion with the evidence of this group of inscriptions it may
be not out of place to say a few words on the view set forth by
Heisterbergk, that the origin of the later serf-colonate was Provincial,
not Italian. He argues[1436] that what ruined small-scale farming in
Italy was above all things the exemption of Italian land from taxation.
Landlords were not constrained by the yearly exaction of dues to make
the best economic use of their estates. Vain land-pride and carelessness
were not checked: mismanagement and waste had free course, and small
cultivation declined. The fall in free rustic population was both effect
and cause. In the younger Pliny’s time good tenants were already hard
to find, but great landlords owned parks and mansions everywhere. In
the Provinces nearly all the land was subject to imperial taxation in
kind or in money, and owners could not afford to let it lie idle. The
practical control of vast estates was not possible from a distance. The
direction of agriculture, especially of extensive farming (corn etc) from
a fixed centre was little less difficult. There was therefore strong
inducement to delegate the business of cultivation to tenants, and to
let the difference in amount between their rents and the yearly imperial
dues represent the landlord’s profit. Thus the spread of _latifundia_
swallowed up small holdings in the Provinces as in Italy; but it
converted small owners into small tenants, and did not merge the holdings
into large slave-gang plantations or throw them into pasture. The plan of
leasing a large estate as a whole to a big head-tenant, or establishing
him in the central ‘manor farm,’ was quite consistent with the general
design, and this theory accounts for the presence of a population of free
_coloni_, whom later legislation might and did bind fast to the soil.

This argument has both ingenuity and force, but we can only assent to it
with considerable reservations. Letting to free _coloni_ was a practice
long used in Italy, and in the first century AD was evidently becoming
more common. It was but natural that it should appear in the Provinces.
Still, taken by itself, there is no obvious reason why it should develope
into serfdom. With the admitted scarcity and rising value of labour, why
was it that the freeman did not improve his position in relation to his
lord, indeed to capitalists in general? I think the presence of the big
lessee, the _conductor_, an employer of slave labour, had not a little
to do with it. Labour as such was despised. The requirement of task-work
to supplement that of slaves on the ‘manor farm’ was not likely to make
labour more esteemed. Yet to get his little holding the _colonus_ had to
put up with this condition. It may be significant that we hear nothing
of _coloni_ working for wages in spare time. Was it likely that they
would do so? Then, when the _conductor_ came to be employed as collector
of rents and other dues on the estate, his opportunities of illicit
exaction gave him more and more power over them; and, combined with their
reluctance to migrate and sacrifice the fruits of past labour, reduced
them[1437] more and more to a state of _de facto_ dependence. At the
worst they would be semi-servile in fact, though free in law; at the
best they would have this outlook, without any apparent alternative to
escape their fate. This, I imagine, was the unhappy situation that was
afterwards recognized by law.

I must not omit to point out that I have said practically nothing
on the subject[1438] of municipal lands and their administration by
the authorities of the several _res publicae_ or _civitates_. Of the
importance of this matter I am well aware, more particularly in connexion
with the development of _emphyteusis_ under the perpetual leases granted
by the municipalities. In a general history of the imperial economics
this topic would surely claim a significant place. But it seems to
have little or no bearing on the labour conditions with which I am
primarily concerned, while it would add greatly to the bulk of a treatise
already too long. So too the incidence of taxation, and the effects of
degradation[1439] of the currency, influences that both played a sinister
part in imperial economics, belong properly to a larger theme. Even
the writers on land-surveying etc, the _agrimensores_ or _gromatici_,
only touch my subject here and there when it is necessary to speak of
tenures, which cannot be ignored in relation to labour-questions. All
these matters are thoroughly and suggestively treated in Seeck’s great
history of the Decline and Fall of the ancient world. Another topic
left out of discussion is the practical difference, if any, between
the terms[1440] _fundus_ and _saltus_ in the imperial domains. I can
find no satisfactory materials for defining it, and it does not appear
to bear any relation to the labour-question. The meaning of the term
_inquilinus_ is a more important matter. If we are to accept Seeck’s
ingenious conclusions[1441], it follows that this term, regularly used by
the jurists of a house-tenant (urban) as opposed to _colonus_ a tenant of
land (rustic), in the course of the second century began to put on a new
meaning. Marcus settled large numbers of barbarians on Roman soil. These
‘indwellers’ were labelled as _inquilini_, a word implying that they
were imported aliens, distinct from the proper residents. An analogous
distinction existed in municipalities between unprivileged ‘indwellers’
(_incolae_) and real _municipes_. Now a jurist’s opinion[1442] in the
first half of the third century speaks of _inquilini_ as attached
(_adhaerent_) to landed estates, and only capable of being bequeathed
to a legatee by inclusion in the landed estate: and it refers to a
rescript of Marcus and Commodus dealing with a point of detail connected
with this rule of law. Thus the _inquilinate_ seems to have been a new
condition implying attachment to the soil, long before the _colonate_
acquired a similar character. For the very few passages, in which the
fixed and dependent nature of the colonate is apparently recognized
before the time of Constantine, are with some reason suspected of having
been tampered with by the compilers of the Digest, or are susceptible
of a different interpretation. It is clear that this intricate question
cannot be fully discussed here. If these rustic _inquilini_ were in their
origin barbarian settlers, perhaps two conclusions regarding them may be
reasonable. First, they seem to be distinct from slaves, the personal
property of individual owners. For the evidence, so far as it goes,
makes them attached[1443] to the land, and only transferable therewith.
Secondly, they are surely labourers, tilling with their own hands the
holdings assigned to them. If this view of them be sound, we may see in
them the beginnings of a serf class. But it does not follow that the
later colonate was a direct growth from this beginning. We have noted
above several other causes contributing to that growth; in particular the
state of _de facto_ fixity combined with increasing dependence, in which
the free _colonus_ was gradually losing his freedom. Whether the later
colonate will ever receive satisfactory explanation in the form of a
simple and convincing theory, I cannot tell: at present it seems best to
admit candidly that, among the various influences tending to produce the
known result, I do not see my way[1444] to distinguish one as supremely
important, and to ignore the effect of others. The opinion[1445] of de
Coulanges, that the origin of the later colonate is mainly to be sought
in the gradual effect of custom (local custom), eventually recognized
(not created) by law, is perhaps the soundest attempt at a brief
expression of the truth.


XLIX. THE JURISTS OF THE DIGEST.

For the position of the _colonus_ in Roman Law during the period known
as that of the ‘classic’ Jurists we naturally find our chief source of
evidence in the Digest. And it is not surprising that here and there we
find passages bearing on labour-questions more or less directly. But in
using this evidence it is most necessary to keep in mind the nature and
scope of this great compilation. First, it is not a collection of laws.
Actual laws were placed in the Codex, based on previous Codes such as
the Theodosian (439 AD), after a careful process of sifting and editing,
with additions to complete the work. This great task was performed by
Justinian’s commissioners in 14 months or less. The Justinian Code was
confirmed and published in 529 AD, and finally in a revised form rather
more than five years later. Secondly, the Digest is a collection of
opinions of lawyers whose competence and authority had been officially
recognized, and whose _responsa_ carried weight in the Roman courts.
From early times interpretation had been found indispensable in the
administration of the law; and in the course of centuries, both by
opinions on cases and by formal treatises, there had grown up such a
mass of written jurisprudence as no man could master. These writings
were specially copious in the ‘classic’ period (say from Hadrian to
Alexander 117-235). Actual laws are sometimes cited in the form of
imperial decisions, finally settling some disputed point. But the normal
product of discussion is the opinion of this or that eminent jurist as
to what is sound law in a particular question. The different opinions of
different authorities are often quoted side by side. If this were all, we
might congratulate ourselves on having simply a collection of authentic
extracts from named authors, conveying their views in their own words.
And no doubt many of the extracts are of this character.

But the position is not in fact so simple as this. Tribonian and his
fellow-commissioners were set to work at the end of the year 530. Their
task was completed and the _Digesta_ published with imperial confirmation
at the end of 533. Now the juristic literature in existence, of which
the Digest was to be an epitome superseding its own sources, was of such
prodigious bulk that three years cannot have been sufficient for the
work. To read, abstract, classify, and so far as possible to harmonize,
this mass of complicated material, was a duty surely needing a much
longer time for its satisfactory performance. Moreover, as this official
Corpus of jurisprudence was designed for reference and citation as an
authority in the courts, it had to be[1446] brought up to date. That
this necessity greatly increased the commissioners’ burden is obvious:
nor less so, that it was a duty peculiarly difficult to discharge in
haste, and liable, if hurried, to result in obscurities inconsistencies
and oversights. That much of the Digest has suffered from overhaste in
its production is now generally admitted. Its evidence is therefore to
be used with caution. But on the subject of _coloni_ the main points of
interest are attested by witnesses of high authority, such as Ulpian, in
cited passages not reasonably suspected of interpolation. And it is not
necessary to follow up a host of details. We have only to reconstruct
from the law-sources the characteristic features of agriculture and
rustic tenancy as it existed before the time of Diocletian; and these
features are on the whole significant and clear. Fortunately we are
not entirely dependent on collection and comparison of scattered
references from all parts of the great compilation. One title (XIX 2
_locati conducti_)[1447] furnishes us with a quantity of relevant matter
classified under one head by the editors themselves.

First and foremost it stands out quite clear that the _colonus_ is a
free man, who enters into a legal contract as lessee with lessor, and
that landlord and tenant are equally bound by the terms of the lease.
If any clause requires interpretation owing to special circumstances
having arisen, the jurist endeavours to lay down the principles by which
the court should be guided to an equitable decision. For instance, any
fact by which the productiveness of a farm and therewith the solvency
of the tenant are impaired may lead to a dispute. Care is therefore
taken to relieve the tenant of responsibility for damage inflicted by
irresistible force (natural or human)[1448] or due to the landlord’s
fault. But defects of climate and soil[1449] give no claim to relief,
since he is presumed to have taken the farm with his eyes open: nor does
the failure of worn-out fruit trees, which tenants were regularly bound
by their covenant to replace. The chief rights of the landlord[1450]
are the proper cultivation of the farm and regular payment of the
rent. In these the law duly protects him. The tenant is bound not to
let down the land by neglect, or to defraud[1451] the landlord by
misappropriating what does not belong to him: rent is secured normally
by sureties (_fideiussores_)[1452] found by the tenant at the time of
leasing, or sometimes by the fact that all property of his on the farm
is expressly pledged[1453] to the lessor on this account. Thus it is the
aim of the law to guard the presumably poorer and humbler party against
hard treatment, while it protects the man of property against fraud. In
other words, it aims at strict enforcement of the terms[1454] of lease,
while inclined to construe genuinely doubtful points or mistakes in
favour[1455] of the party bound. That landlord and tenant, even in cases
of fixed money rent, have a certain community[1456] of interest, seems
recognized in the fact that some legal remedies against third persons
(for malicious damage etc) could in some cases be employed[1457] by
either landlord or tenant. In short, the latter is a thoroughly free and
responsible person.

That a tenant should be protected against disturbance[1458] was a matter
of course. During the term of his lease he has a right to make his lawful
profit on the farm: the landlord is not only bound to allow him full
enjoyment (_frui licere_), but to prevent molestation by a third party
over whom he has control. Indeed the tenant farmer has in some relations
a more positive protection than the landlord himself. Thus a person
who has right of _usus_ over an estate may in certain circumstances
refuse[1459] to admit the _dominus_; but not the _colonus_ or his staff
of slaves employed in the farm-work. Change of ownership can perhaps
never be a matter of indifference to the sitting tenant of a farm. But
it is the lawyer’s aim to see that the passing of the property shall not
impair the tenant’s rights under his current lease. A lease sometimes
contained clauses fixing the terms (such as a money forfeit)[1460] on
which the contract might be broken; in fact a cross-guarantee between
the parties, securing the tenant against damage by premature ejectment
and the landlord against damage by the tenant’s premature quitting. The
jurists often appeal to local custom as a means of equitable decision on
disputed points. But one customary principle seems to be recognized[1461]
as of general validity, the rule of _reconductio_. If, on expiration
of a lease, the tenant holds on and the landlord allows him to remain,
it is regarded as a renewal of the contract by bare agreement (_nudo
consensu_). No set form of lease is necessary; but this tacit contract
holds good only from year to year. Another fact significant as to the
position of the _colonus_ is that he is assumed to have the right to
sublet[1462] the farm: questions that would in that case arise are dealt
with as matters of course. I suppose that a lease might be so drawn as
to bar any such right, but that in practice it was always or generally
admitted. Again, it is a sign of his genuinely independent position
in the eye of the law that his own oath, if required of him, may be
accepted[1463] as a counter-active plea (_exceptio iurisiurandi_) in his
own defence, when sued by his landlord for damage done on the farm.

On the economic side we have first to remark that the _colonus_ is
represented as normally a man of small means. It is true that in the
Digest _conductor_ and _colonus_ are not clearly[1464] distinguished, as
we find them in the African inscriptions and in the later law. For the
former is simply the counterpart of _locator_, properly connoting the
relation between the contracting parties: _colonus_ expresses the fact
that the cultivation (_colere_) of land belonging to another devolves
upon him by virtue of the contract. Every _colonus_ is a _conductor_,
but not every _conductor_ a _colonus_. Now custom, recognized by the
lawyers, provided a means of supplying the small man’s need of capital.
To set him up in a farm, the landlord equipped him with a certain stock
(_instrumentum_). This he took over at a valuation, not paying ready
money for it, but accepting liability[1465] to account for the value at
the end of his tenancy. The stock or plant included[1466] implements
and animals (oxen, slaves, etc), and a miscellaneous array of things,
of course varying with the nature of the farm and local custom. To
this nucleus he had inevitably to add belongings[1467] of his own,
which were likely to increase with time if the farm prospered in his
hands. His rent[1468] might be either a fixed yearly payment in cash
or produce, or a proportionate share of produce varying from year to
year. The money-rent[1469] seems to have been the usual plan, and it
was in connexion therewith that claims for abatement generally arose.
The impression left by the frequent references to _reliqua_ in the
Digest, and the experiences of the younger Pliny, is that tenant-farmers
in Italy were habitually behind with their rents and claiming[1470]
_remissio_. This is probably true of the period (say) 100-250 AD, with
which we are here concerned. It was probably a time of great difficulty
for both landlords and tenants, at least outside the range of suburban
market-gardening. Signs are not lacking that want of sufficient
capital[1471] cramped the vigour of agriculture directly and indirectly.
Improvements might so raise the standard of cultivation on an estate as
to leave an awkward problem for the owner. Its upkeep on its present
level might need a large capital; tenants of means were not easy to find,
and subdivision into smaller holdings would not in all circumstances
provide a satisfactory solution. Moreover, if the man of means was not
unlikely to act independently, in defiance of the landlord, the small man
was more likely to take opportunities of misappropriating things to which
he was not entitled.

All these difficulties, and others, suggest no great prosperity in
Italian agriculture of the period. That on certain soils farming did not
pay, was as well known[1472] to the jurists as to other writers. And one
great cause of agricultural decline appears in their incidental remarks
as clearly as in literature. It was the devotion of much of the best land
in the best situations to the unproductive parks and pleasure-grounds of
the rich. This can hardly be laid to the account of the still favoured
financial position of Italy as compared with the Provinces, for we find
the same state of things existing late in the fourth century, when Italy
had long been provincialized and taxed accordingly. It was fashion, and
fashion of long standing, that caused this evil. And this cause was
itself an effect of the conditions of investment. The syndicates for
exploiting provincial dues had gone with the Republic. State contracts
and industrial enterprises were not enough to employ all the available
capital. The ownership of land, now that politics were not a school of
ambition, was more than ever the chief source of social importance. A
man who could afford to own vast unremunerative estates was a great
personage. We may add that such estates, being unremunerative, were less
likely to attract the fatal attention of bad emperors, while good rulers
deliberately encouraged rich men to invest fortunes in them as being an
evidence of loyalty to the government. The uneconomic rural conditions
thus created are plainly referred to in the staid remarks of the jurists.
We read of estates owned for pleasure (_voluptaria praedia_)[1473]: of
cases where it may be doubted[1474] whether the _fundus_ does not rather
belong to the _villa_ than the _villa_ to the _fundus_: and the use
of the word _praetorium_[1475] (= great mansion, palace, ‘Court’) for
the lord’s headquarters on his demesne becomes almost official in the
mouth of lawyers. Meanwhile great estates abroad could be, and were,
profitable to their owners, who drew rent from tenants and were normally
non-resident. Yet _praetoria_ were sometimes found even in the Provinces.

In connexion with this topic it is natural to consider the questions of
upkeep and improvements. The former is simple. As the tenant has the
disposal of the crops raised and gathered (_fructus_), he is bound[1476]
to till the soil, to keep up the stock of plants, and to see that the
drainage of the farm is in working order. Further detail is unnecessary,
as his liability must be gauged by the state of the farm when he took
it over. Improvements look to the future. From the lawyers we get only
the legal point of view, which is of some interest as proving that
the subject was of sufficient importance not to be overlooked. Now it
seems certain that a _conductor_ or _colonus_ had a right of action to
recover[1477] from the _dominus_ not only compensation for unexhausted
improvements, but his whole outlay on them, if shewn to have been
beneficial. Or his claim might rest on the fact that the project had
been approved[1478] by the landlord. But it might happen that a work
beneficial to the particular estate was detrimental to a neighbouring
one. In such a case, against whom—landlord or tenant—had the owner of
that estate a legal remedy? It was held that, if the tenant had carried
out the work in question[1479] without his landlord’s knowledge, he
alone was liable. If, as some held, the landlord was bound to provide a
particular remedy, he could recover the amount paid under this head from
his tenant. To insure the owner against loss from the acts of his lessee
was evidently an object of the first importance, and this is in harmony
with the Roman lawyers’ intense respect for rights of property. The
general impression left on the reader of their utterances on this subject
is that a landlord, after providing a considerable _instrumentum_, had
done all that could reasonably be expected from him. Improvements,
the desirability of which was usually discovered through the tenant’s
experience, were normally regarded as the tenant’s business: it was only
necessary to prevent the landlord from arbitrarily confiscating what the
tenant had done to improve his property. Obviously such ‘improvements’
were likely to occasion disputes as to the value of the work done: but it
was the custom of the countryside to refer technical questions of this
kind to the arbitration of an impartial umpire (_vir bonus_), no doubt a
neighbour familiar with local circumstances. On the whole, it does not
appear that the law treated the _colonus_ badly under this head, and the
difficulty of securing good tenants may be supposed to have guaranteed
him against unfair administration.

A great many more details illustrating the position of _coloni_ as they
appear in the Digest could be added here, but I think the above will be
found ample for my purpose. The next topic to be dealt with is that of
labour, so far as the references of the lawyers give us any information.
First it is to be noted that the two systems[1480] of estate-management,
that of cultivation for landlord’s account by his _actor_ or _vilicus_,
and that of letting to tenant farmers, were existing side by side. The
latter plan was to all appearance more commonly followed than it would
seem to have been in the time of Columella, but the former was still
working. A confident opinion as to the comparative frequency[1481] of
the two systems is hardly to be formed on Digest evidence: for in rustic
matters the interest of lawyers was almost solely concerned with the
relations of landlord and tenant. What an owner did with his own property
on his own account was almost entirely his own business. There are signs
that a certain change in the traditional nomenclature represents a real
change of function in the case of landlords’ managers. The term _actor_
is superseding[1482] _vilicus_, but the _vilicus_ still remains. He would
seem to be now more of a mere farm-bailiff, charged with the cultivation
of some part or parts of an estate that are not let to tenants. It
may even be that he is left with a free hand and only required to pay
a fixed[1483] yearly return. If so, this arrangement is not easily
to be distinguished from the case of a slave _colonus_ or _quasi
colonus_[1484] occupying a farm. The financial and general supervision
of the estate is in the hands of the _actor_[1485], who collects all
dues, including rents of _colonie_ and is held to full account[1486] for
all these receipts as well as for the contents of the store-rooms. He
is a slave, but a valuable and trusted man: it is significant that the
manumission[1487] of _actores_ is not seldom mentioned. Evidently the
qualities looked for in such an agent were observed to develope most
readily under a prospect of freedom. But, so long as he remained _actor_
of an estate, he could be regarded as part of it: in a bequest the
testator could include him as a part[1488], and often did so: and indeed
his peculiar knowledge of local detail must often have been an important
element in its value. To employ such a person in the management of an
estate, with powerful inducements to good conduct, may have solved many
a difficult problem. We may perhaps guess that it made the employment of
a qualified legal agent (_procurator_) less often necessary, at least if
the _actor_ contrived to avoid friction with his master’s free tenants.

Whether an estate was farmed for the owner by his manager, or let to
tenants, or partly on one system partly on the other, it is clear
that slave-labour is assumed as the normal basis of working. For the
_colonus_ takes over slaves supplied by the _dominus_ as an item of
the _instrumentum_. And there was nothing to prevent him from adding
slaves of his own, if he could afford it and thought it worth his while
to employ a larger staff. Whether such additions were often or ever
made, we must not expect the lawyers to tell us; but we do now and then
hear[1489] of a slave who is the tenant’s own. Such a slave might as
part of the tenant’s goods be pledged to the landlord as security for
his rent, but he would not be a part of the estate of which the landlord
could dispose by sale or bequest. In such a case the slaves might be
regarded[1490] as accessories of the _fundus_, if it were so agreed. This
raised questions as to the degree of connexion that should be treated
as qualifying a slave to be considered an appurtenance of a farm. The
answer was in effect that he must be a member of the regular staff. Mere
temporary employment on the place did not so attach him, mere temporary
absence on duty elsewhere did not detach him. A further question was
whether all slaves in any sort of employment on the place were included,
or only such as were actually engaged in farm work proper, cultivation
of the soil, not those employed in various subsidiary[1491] industries.
These questions the jurists discussed fully, but we cannot follow them
here, as their legal importance is chiefly in connexion with property
and can hardly have affected seriously the position of tenants. But it
is interesting to observe that the lawyers were feeling the necessity of
attempting some practical classification. The distinction[1492] between
_urbana_ and _rustica mancipia_ was old enough as a loose conversational
or literary one. But, when rights of inheritance or legacy of such
valuable property were involved, it became important to define (if
possible) the essential characteristics of a ‘rustic’ slave.

That the condition of the rustic slave was improving, and generally far
better than it had been on the _latifundia_ of Republican days, seems
indicated by the jurists’ speaking of a slave as _colonus_ or _quasi
colonus_ without any suggestion of strangeness in the relation. We may
assume that only slaves of exceptional capacity and merit would be placed
in a position of economic (if not legal) equality with free tenants.
Still the growth of such a custom can hardly have been without some
effect on the condition of rustic slaves in general. It was not new in
the second century: it is referred to by a jurist[1493] of the Augustan
age. The increasing difficulty of getting either good tenants or good
slaves no doubt induced landlords to entrust farms to men who could and
would work them profitably, whether freemen or slaves. And a slave had
in agriculture, as in trades and finance, a point in his favour: his
person and his goods[1494] remained in his master’s power. If by skilled
and honest management he relieved his master of trouble and worry, and
contributed by regular payment of rent to assure his income, it was
reasonable to look for gratitude expressed, on the usual Roman lines, in
his master’s will. Manumission, perhaps accompanied by bequest[1495] of
the very farm that he had worked so well, was a probable reward. May we
not guess that some of the best farming carried on in Italy under the
earlier Empire was achieved by trusted slaves, in whom servile apathy was
overcome by hope? Such a farmer-slave would surely have under him[1496]
slave labourers, the property of his master; and he would have the
strongest possible motives for tact and skill in their management, while
his own capacity had been developed by practical experience. I can point
to no arrangement in Roman agriculture so calculated to make it efficient
on a basis of slavery as this.

The services (_operae_) of a slave, due to his owner or to some one in
place of his owner, were a property capable of valuation, and therefore
could be let and hired at a price. That is, the person to whom they
were due could commute[1497] them for a _merces_. This might, as in the
corresponding Greek case of ἀποφορά, be a paying business, if a slave had
been bought cheap and trained so as to earn good wages. It was common
enough in various trades: what concerns us is that the plan was evidently
in use in the rustic world also. Now this is notable. We naturally ask,
if the man’s services were worth so much to the hirer, why should they
not have been worth as much (or even a little more) to his own master?
Why should it pay to let him rather than to use him yourself? Of course
the owner might have more slaves than he needed at the moment: or the
hirer might be led by temporary need of labour to offer a fancy price
for the accommodation: or two masters on neighbouring farms might engage
in a reciprocity of cross-hirings to suit their mutual convenience at
certain seasons. Further possibilities might be suggested, but are such
occasional explanations sufficient to account for the prevalence of this
hiring-system? I think not. Surely the principal influence, steadily
operating in this direction, was one that implied an admission of the
economic failure of slavery. If A’s slave worked for B so well that
it paid A to let him do so and to receive a rent for his services, it
follows that the slave had some inducement to exert his powers more fully
as B’s hireling than in the course of ordinary duty under his own master.
Either the nature and conditions of the work under B were pleasanter,
or he received something for himself over and above the stipulated sum
claimed by his master. In other words, as a mere slave he did not do his
best: as a hired man he felt some of the stimulus that a free man gets
from the prospect of his wage. So Slavery, already philanthropically
questioned, was in this confession economically condemned.

These points considered, we are not surprised to find mention of slaves
letting out their own[1498] _operae_. This must imply the consent of
their masters, and it is perhaps not rash to see in such a situation
a sign of weakening in the effective authority of masters. A master
whose interest is bound up with the fullest development of his slave’s
powers (as rentable property exposed to competition) will hardly act the
martinet without forecasting the possible damage to his own pocket. A
slave who knows that his master draws an income from his efficiency is
in a strong position for gradually extorting privileges till he attains
no small degree of independence. We may perhaps find traces of such an
advance in the arrangement by which a slave hires his own _operae_[1499]
from his master. He will thus make a profit out of hiring himself: in
fact he is openly declaring that he will not work at full power for his
master, but only compound with him for output on the scale of an ordinary
slave. This arrangement was common in arts and handicrafts, and not
specially characteristic of Rome. In rustic life, the slave put into a
farm as tenant[1500] at a fixed rent, and taking profit and loss, may
furnish an instance. Whether such cases were frequent we do not know.
The general impression left by the Digest passages on hiring and letting
of slaves is that, when we read of _mercennarii_, it is generally if not
always hireling[1501] slaves, not free wage-earners, that are meant.
In a passage[1502] where _servus_ occurs as well as _mercennarius_, it
is reference to the owner as well as to the hirer that necessitates
the addition. If I have interpreted these points aright, the picture
suggested is a state of things in which the rustic slave was steadily
improving his position, supplying hired labour, at times entrusted with
the charge of a farm, and with a fair prospect of becoming by manumission
under his owner’s will a free _colonus_, or even his own landlord. How
far this picture is really characteristic of rustic Italy, or of the
Provinces (such as Gaul or Spain), is what one would like to know, but I
can find no evidence.

In the foregoing paragraphs I have refrained from inquiring whether the
_colonus_ as he appears in the Digest was a farmer who worked with his
own hands, or merely an employer and director of labour. The reason is
that I have found in the texts no evidence whatever on the point. It was
not the jurist’s business. We are left to guess at the truth as best
we may, and we can only start from consideration of the farmer’s own
interest, and assume that the average farmer knew his own interest and
was guided thereby. Now, being bound to pay rent in some form or other
and to make good any deficiencies in the _instrumentum_ at the end of
his tenancy, he had every inducement to get all he could out of the land
while he held it. How best to do this, was his problem. And the answer
no doubt varied according to the size of the farm, the kind of crops
that could profitably be raised there, and the number and quality of the
staff. In some rough operations, his constant presence on one spot and
sharing the actual work might get the most out of his men. Where nicety
of skill was the main thing, he might better spend his time in direction
and minute watching of the hands. On a fairly large farm he would have
enough to do as director. We may reasonably guess that he only toiled
with his own hands if he thought it would pay him to do so. This _a
priori_ guesswork is not satisfactory. But I see nothing else to be said;
for the African inscriptions do not help us. The circumstances of those
great domains were exceptional.

So far we have been viewing agriculture as proceeding in times and under
conditions assumed to be more or less normal, without taking account of
the various disturbing elements in rustic life, by which both landlords
and tenants were liable to suffer vexation and loss. Yet these were not a
few. Even a lawyer could not ignore wild beasts. Wolves carried off some
of A’s pigs. Dogs kept by B, _colonus_ of a neighbouring _villa_, for
protection of his own flocks, rescued the pigs. A legal question[1503] at
once arises: are the rescued pigs regarded as wild game, and therefore
belonging to the owner of the dogs? No, says the jurist. They were still
within reach; A had not given them up for lost; if B tries to retain
them, the law provides remedies to make him give them up. I presume that
B would have a claim to some reward for his services. But the lawyer is
silent, confining his opinion to the one question of property. References
to depredations of robbers or brigands (_latrones_, _grassatores_,) occur
often, and quite as a matter of course. The police of rural Italy, not to
mention the Provinces, was an old scandal. Stock-thieves, who lifted a
farmer’s cattle sheep or goats, and sometimes his crops, were important
enough to have a descriptive name (_abigei_)[1504] and a title of the
Digest to themselves. That bad neighbours made themselves unpleasant in
many ways, and that their presence gave a bad name to properties near
them, was an experience of all lands and all ages: but the jurists treat
it gravely[1505] as a lawyer’s matter. Concealment of such a detrimental
fact[1506] by the seller of an estate made the sale voidable. The rich
(old offenders in this kind) were by a rescript of Hadrian[1507] awarded
differential punishment for removing landmarks: in their case the purpose
of encroachment was not a matter open to doubt.

In one connexion the use of force as an embarrassing feature of rustic
life was a subject of peculiar interest to the jurists, and had long
been so. This was in relation to questions of possession. In Roman law
_possessio_ held a very important place. All that need be said of it here
is that the fact of possession, or lack of it, seriously affected the
position of litigants in disputes as to property. Great ingenuity was
exercised in definition and in laying down rules for ascertaining the
fact. Now among the means employed in gaining or recovering possession
none was more striking or more effective than the use of force.
Special legal remedies had been provided to deal with such violence;
_interdicta_ issued by the praetor, to forbid it, or to reinstate a
claimant dislodged by his rival, or simply to state the exact issue
raised in a particular case. On conformity or disobedience to the
praetor’s order the case was formally tried in court: the question of
law mainly turned on questions of fact. What concerns us is that force
was solemnly classified under two heads, _vis_ and _vis armata_. Each
of these had its own proper interdict at least as early as the time of
Cicero, and they occupy a whole title[1508] in the Digest. Clearly the
use of force was no negligible matter. That it was a danger or at least
a nuisance to owners or claimants of _property_, is not less clear.
But how did it touch the _colonus_? He was, as such, neither owner nor
claimant of the property of his farm. He had in his own capacity[1509] no
_possession_ either. But, as tenant of a particular owner, his presence
operated[1510] to secure the possession of his landlord. Hence to oust
him by force broke the landlord’s possession; whether rightly or wrongly,
the law had to decide. Now it is obvious that, in cases where serious
affrays resulted from intrusion, a tenant might suffer grave damage to
his goods and person. The intruders (often a gang of slaves) would seldom
be so punctiliously gentle as to do no harm at all. Therefore, having
regard to the amount of interest in this subject shewn by the lawyers, we
cannot omit the use of force in matters of possession from the list of
rustic embarrassments.

Another cause of annoyance was connected with servitudes, such as rights
of way and water, which were frequent subjects of dispute in country
districts. Whether regarded as rights or as burdens, the principles
governing them were a topic that engaged the minute and laborious
attention[1511] of the lawyers. Now it is evident that a right of way or
water through an estate, though a material advantage to a neighbouring
estate served by the convenience, might be a material disadvantage to
the one over which the right extended. Also that the annoyance might be
indefinitely increased or lessened by the cantankerous or considerate
user of the right by the person or persons enjoying it. When we consider
that servitudes were already an important department of jurisprudence in
Republican days, and see how great a space they occupy in the Digest, we
can hardly resist the conclusion that country proprietors found in them
a fertile subject of quarrels. But surely the quarrels of landlords over
a matter of this kind could not be carried on without occasional and
perhaps frequent disturbances and injury to the tenants on the land. Even
if the law provided means of getting compensation for any damage done to
a tenant’s crops or other goods in the course of attempts to enforce or
defeat a claimed servitude, was the average _colonus_ a man readily to
seek compensation in the law-courts? I think not. But, if not, he would
depend solely on the goodwill of his own landlord, supposing the latter
to have got the upper hand in the main dispute. On the whole, I strongly
suspect that in practice these quarrels over rustic servitudes were a
greater nuisance to farmers than might be supposed. So far as I know, we
have no statement of the farmer’s point of view. Another intermittent
but damaging occurrence was the occasional passage of soldiery, whose
discipline was often lax. We might easily forget the depredations and
general misconduct of these unruly ruffians, and imagine that such
annoyances only became noticeable in a later period. But the jurists
do not allow us to forget[1512] the military requisitions for supply
of troops on the march, the payment for which is not clearly provided,
and would at best be a cause of trouble; or the pilferings of the men,
compensation for which was probably not to be had. It would be farmers in
northern Italy and the frontier-provinces that were the chief sufferers.

Damage by natural disturbances or by fires may happen in any age or
country. That Italy in particular was exposed to the effect of floods and
earthquakes, we know. Accordingly the lawyers are seriously concerned
with the legal and equitable questions arising out of such events. It was
not merely the claim of tenants[1513] to abatement of rent that called
for a statement of principles. Beside the sudden effects of earthquakes
torrents or fires, there were the slower processes of streams changing
their courses[1514] and gradual land-slides on the slopes of hills. These
movements generally affected the proprietary relations of neighbouring
landlords, taking away land from one, sometimes giving to another.
Here was a fine opening for ingenious jurists, of which they took full
advantage. The growth of estates by alluvion, and loss by erosion, was
a favourite topic, the operation of which, and the questions thereby
raised, are so earnestly treated as to shew their great importance in
country life. Of fire-damage, due to malice or neglect, no more need be
said; nor of many other minor matters.

But, when all the above drawbacks have been allowed for, it is still
probably true that scarcity of labour was a far greater difficulty for
farmers. We hear very little directly of this trouble, as it raised no
point of law. Very significant[1515] however are the attempts of the
Senate and certain emperors to put down an inveterate scandal which
is surely good indirect evidence of the scarcity. It consisted in the
harbouring[1516] of runaway slaves on the estates of other landlords. A
runaway from one estate was of course not protected and fed on another
estate from motives of philanthropy. The slave would be well aware that
severe punishment awaited him if recovered by his owner, and therefore
be willing to work for a new master who might, if displeased, surrender
him any day. The landlords guilty of this treason to the interests
of their class were probably the same as those who harboured[1517]
brigands, another practice injurious to peaceful agriculture both in
Italy and abroad. Another inconvenience, affecting all trades and all
parts of the empire in various degrees, was the local difference in
the money-value[1518] of commodities in different markets. This was
sometimes great: and that it was troublesome to farmers may be inferred
from the particular mention of wine oil and corn as cases in point. No
doubt dealers had the advantage over producers, as they generally have,
through possessing a more than local knowledge of necessary facts. These
middlemen however could not be dispensed with, as experience shewed,
and one of the later jurists[1519] openly recognized. Facilities for
borrowing, and rates of interest, varied greatly in various centres.
But all these market questions do not seem to have been so acute as to
be a public danger until the ruinous debasement of the currency in the
time of Gallienus. A few references may be found to peculiar usages of
country life in particular Provinces. Thus we read that in Arabia[1520]
farms were sometimes ‘boycotted,’ any person cultivating such a farm
being threatened with assassination. In Egypt[1521] special care had to
be taken to protect the dykes regulating the distribution of Nile water.
Both these offences were summarily dealt with by the provincial governor,
and the penalty was death. Here we have one more proof of the anxiety of
the imperial government to insure the greatest possible production of
food. The empire was always hungry,—and so were the barbarians. And the
northern frontier provinces could not feed both themselves and the armies.

While speaking of landlords and tenants we must not forget that all over
the empire considerable areas of land were owned by municipalities,
and dealt with at the discretion of the local authorities. Variety of
systems was no doubt dictated by variety of local circumstances: but
one characteristic was so general as to deserve special attention on the
part of jurists. This was the system of perpetual leaseholds[1522] at
a fixed (and undoubtedly beneficial) rent, heritable and transferable
to assigns. So long as the tenant regularly paid the _vectigal_, his
occupation was not to be disturbed. It was evidently the desire of the
municipal authorities to have a certain income to reckon with: for the
sake of certainty they would put up with something less than a rack-rent.
There were also other lands owned by these _civitates_ that were let on
the system[1523] in use by private landlords; the normal term probably
being five years. Of these no more need be said here. Beneficial leases
under a municipality were liable to corrupt management. It had been found
necessary[1524] to disqualify members of the local Senate (_decuriones_)
from holding such leases, that they might not share out the common lands
among themselves on beneficial terms. But this prohibition was not
enough. The town worthies put in men of straw[1525] as nominal tenants,
through whom they enjoyed the benefits of the leases. So this evasion
also had to be met by revoking the ill-gotten privilege. But disturbance
of tenancies was not to be lightly allowed, so it appears that a
reference to the emperor[1526] was necessary before such revocation
could take place. This system of perpetual leases is of interest, not
as indicating different methods of cultivation from those practised on
private estates, but as betraying a tendency to fixity[1527] already
existing, destined to spread and to take other forms, and to become
the fatal characteristic of the later Empire. Another striking piece
of evidence in the same direction occurs in connexion with the lessees
(_publicani_) of various state dues (_vectigalia publica_) farmed out
in the usual way. In the first half of the third century the jurist
Paulus attests[1528] the fact that, in case it was found that the right
of collecting such dues, hitherto very profitable to the lessees, could
only be let at a lower lump sum than hitherto, the old lessees were held
bound to continue their contract at the old price. But Callistratus,
contemporary or nearly so, tells us that this was not so, and
quotes[1529] a rescript of Hadrian (117-138 AD) condemning the practice
as tyrannical and likely to deter men from entering into so treacherous
a bargain. It appears that other[1530] emperors had forbidden it, but
there is no proof that they succeeded in stopping it. At all events
the resort to coercion in a matter of contract like this reveals the
presence of a belief in compulsory fixity, ominous of the coming imperial
paralysis, though of course not so understood at the time. It did not
directly affect agriculture as yet; but its application to agriculture
was destined to be a symptom and a cause of the empire’s decline and fall.

Another group of tenancies, the number and importance of which was
quietly increasing, was that known as _praedia Caesaris_[1531], _fundi
fiscales_, and so forth. We need not discuss the departmental differences
and various names of these estates. The tenants, whether small men or
_conductores_ on a large scale who sublet in parcels[1532] to _coloni_,
held either directly or indirectly from the emperor. We have seen
specimens in Africa, the Province in which the crown-properties were
exceptionally large. What chiefly concerns us here is the imperial
land-policy. It seems clear that its first aim was to keep these estates
permanently occupied by good solvent tenants. The surest means to this
end was to give these estates a good name, to create a general impression
that on imperial farms a man had a better chance of thriving than on
those of average private landlords. Now the ‘state,’ that is the emperor
or his departmental chiefs, could favour crown-tenants in various ways
without making a material sacrifice of a financial kind. In particular,
the treatment of crown-estates as what we call ‘peculiars,’ in which
local disputes were settled, not by resort to the courts of ordinary law,
but administratively[1533] by the emperor’s _procuratores_, was probably
a great relief; above all to the humbler _coloni_, whom we may surely
assume to have been a class averse to litigation. No doubt a _procurator_
might be corrupted and unjust. But he was probably far more effectually
watched than ordinary magistrates; and, if the worst came to the worst,
there was as we have seen the hope of a successful appeal to the emperor.
Another favour consisted in the exemption of Caesar’s tenants from
various burdensome official duties in municipalities, the so-called
_munera_, which often entailed great expense. This is mentioned by a
jurist[1534] near the end of the second century: they are only to perform
such duties so far as not to cause loss to the treasury. Another[1535],
somewhat later, says that their exemption is granted in order that
they may be more suitable tenants of treasury-farms. This exemption is
one more evidence of the well-known fact that in this age municipal
offices were beginning to be evaded[1536] as ruinous, and no longer
sought as an honour. We must note that, if this _immunitas_ relieved
the crown-tenants, it left all the more burdens to be borne by those who
enjoyed no such relief. And this cannot have been good for agriculture in
general.

It is not to be supposed that the _fiscus_[1537] was a slack and easy
landlord. Goods of debtors were promptly seized to cover liabilities:
attempts to evade payment of _tributa_ by a private agreement[1538]
between mortgagor and mortgagee were quashed: a rescript[1539] of Marcus
and Verus insisted on the treasury share (½) of treasure trove: and
so on. But there are signs of a reasonable and considerate policy, in
not pressing demands so as to inflict hardship. Trajan[1540] had set a
good example, and good emperors followed it. We may fairly guess that
this moderation in financial dealings was not wholly laid aside in
the management of imperial estates. Nor is it to be imagined that the
advantages of imperial tenants were exactly the same in all parts of the
empire. In Provinces through which armies had to move it is probable that
_coloni Caesaris_ would suffer less[1541] than ordinary farmers from
military annoyances. But on the routes to and from a seat of war it is
obvious that the imperial post-service would be subjected to exceptional
strain. Now this service was at the best of times[1542] a cause of
vexations and losses to the farmers along the line of traffic. The
staff made good all deficiencies in their requirements by taking beasts
fodder vehicles etc wherever they could find them: what they restored
was much the worse for wear, and compensation, if ever got, was tardy
and inadequate. The repair of roads was another pretext for exaction.
It is hardly to be doubted that in these respects imperial tenants
suffered less than others. Some emperors[1543] took steps to ease the
burden, which had been found too oppressive to the roadside estates. But
this seems to have been no more than relief from official requisitions:
irregular ‘commandeering’ was the worst evil, and we have no reason to
think that it was effectually suppressed. It appears in the next period
as a rampant abuse, vainly forbidden by the laws of the Theodosian code.


L. THE LATER COLONATE, ITS PLACE IN ROMAN HISTORY.

In the endeavour to extract from scattered and fragmentary evidence
some notion of agricultural conditions in the Roman empire before and
after Diocletian we are left with two imperfect pictures, so strongly
contrasted as to suggest a suspicion of their truth. We can hardly
believe that the system known as the later Colonate appeared in full
force as a sudden phenomenon. Nor indeed are we compelled to fly so
directly in the face of historical experience. That we have no narrative
of the steps that led to this momentous change, is surely due to the
inability of contemporaries to discern the future effect of tendencies
operating silently[1544] and piecemeal. What seems at the moment
insignificant, even if observed, is seldom recorded, and very seldom
intentionally. Hence after generations, seeking to trace effects to
causes, are puzzled by defects of record. Their only resource is to
supplement, so far as possible, defective record by general consideration
of the history of the time in question and cautious inference therefrom:
in fact to get at the true meaning of fragmentary admissions in relation
to their historical setting. The chief topic to be dealt with here from
this point of view is the character of the Roman Empire in several
aspects. For among all the anxieties of the government during these
troubled centuries the one that never ceased was the fear of failure in
supplies of food.

The character of the Roman Empire had been largely determined by the
fact that it arose from the overthrow of a government that had long
been practically aristocratic. The popular movements that contributed
to this result only revealed the impossibility of establishing anything
like a democracy, and the unreality of any power save the power of the
sword. The great dissembler Augustus concealed a virtual autocracy by
conciliatory handling of the remains of the nobility. But the Senate, to
which he left or gave many powers, was never capable of bearing a vital
part in the administration, and its influence continued to dwindle under
his successors. The master of the army was the master of the empire,
and influence was more and more vested in those who were able to guide
his policy. That these might be, and sometimes were, not born Romans at
all, but imperial freedmen generally of Greek or mixed-Greek origin,
was a very significant fact. In particular, it marked and encouraged
the growth of departmental bureaus, permanent and efficient beyond the
standard of previous Roman experience. But the price of this efficiency
was centralization, a condition that carried with it inevitable dangers,
owing to the vast extent of the empire. In modern times the fashionable
remedy suggested for over-centralization is devolution of powers to local
governments controlling areas of considerable size. Or, in cases of
aggregation, the existing powers left to states merged in a confederation
are considerable. In any case, the subordinate units are free to act
within their several limited spheres, and the central government
respects their ‘autonomy,’ only interfering in emergencies to enforce the
fulfilment of definite common obligations.

But, if it had been desired to gain any such relief by a system of
devolution within the Roman empire, this would have meant the recognition
of ‘autonomy’ in the Provinces. And this was inconceivable. The extension
of Roman dominion had been achieved by dividing Rome’s adversaries. Once
conquered, it was the interest or policy of the central power to keep
them in hand by preventing the growth of self-conscious cohesion in the
several units. Each Province was, as the word implied, a department of
the Roman system, ruled by a succession of Roman governors. It looked to
Rome for orders, for redress of grievances, for protection at need. If
the advance of Rome destroyed no true nations, her government at least
made the development of truly national characteristics impossible, while
she herself formed no Roman nation. Thus, for better or worse, the empire
was _non-national_. But, as we have already seen, the decline of Italy
made it more and more clear that the strength of the empire lay in the
Provinces. Now, having no share in initiative and no responsibility, the
Provinces steadily lost vitality under Roman civilization, and became
more and more helplessly dependent on the central power. As the strain on
the empire became greater, the possibility of relief by devolution grew
less: but more centralization was no cure for what was already a disease.

That local government of a kind existed in the empire is true enough;
also that it was one of the most striking and important features of
the system. But it was municipal, and tended rather to subdivide than
to unite. It was the outcome of a civilization profoundly urban in
its origins and ideas. The notion that a city was a state was by no
means confined to the independent cities of early Greece. Whether it
voluntarily merged itself in a League or lived on as a subordinate unit
in the system of a dominant power, the city and its territory were
politically one. Within their several boundaries the townsmen and rustic
citizens of each city were subject to the authorities of that community.
Beyond their own boundary they were aliens under the authorities of
another city. It is no wonder that jealousies between neighbour cities
were often extreme, and that Roman intervention was often needed to keep
the peace between rivals. But the system suited Roman policy. In the East
and wherever cities existed they were taken over as administrative units
and as convenient centres of taxation: in the West it was found useful
and practicable to introduce urban centres into tribes and cantons, and
even in certain districts to attach[1545] local populations to existing
cities as dependent hamlets. And, so long as the imperial government
was able to guard the frontiers and avert the shock of disturbances of
the Roman peace, the empire held its own in apparent prosperity. To
some historians the period of the ‘Antonines’ (say about 100-170 AD)
has seemed a sort of Golden Age. But signs are not lacking that the
municipal system had seen its best days. The severe strain on imperial
resources in the time of Marcus left behind it general exhaustion.
The decay of local patriotism marked the pressure of poverty and loss
of vitality in the cities. More and more their importance became that
of mere taxation-centres, in which the evasion of duty was the chief
preoccupation: they could not reinvigorate the empire, nor the empire
them.

Another characteristic of the empire, not less significant than those
mentioned above, was this: taken as a whole, it was _non-industrial_.
Manufactures existed here and there, and products of various kinds were
exchanged between various parts of the empire. So far as the ordinary
population was concerned, the Roman world might well have supplied its
own needs. But this was not enough. The armies, though perilously small
for the work they had to do, were a heavy burden. The imperial civil
service as it became more elaborate did not become less costly. The waste
of resources on unremunerative buildings and shows in cities, above all
in Rome, and the ceaseless expense of feeding a worthless rabble, were
a serious drain: ordained by established custom, maintained by vanity,
to economize on these follies would seem a confession of weakness. Nor
should the extravagance of the rich, and of many emperors, be forgotten:
this created a demand for luxuries chiefly imported from the East;
precious stones, delicate fabrics, spices, perfumes, rare woods, ivory,
and so forth. Rome had no goods to export in payment for such things, and
the scarcity of return-cargoes must have added heavily to the cost of
carriage. There was on this account a steady drain of specie to the East,
and this had to be met by a corresponding drain of specie to Rome. In one
form or another this meant money drawn from the Provinces, for which the
Provinces received hardly the bare pretence of an equivalent, or a better
security for peace.

Thus the empire, created by conquest and absorption, administered by
bureaucratic centralization, _rested on force_; a force partly real and
still present, partly traditional, derived from a victorious past. The
belief in Rome as the eternal city went for much, and we hear of no
misgivings as to the soundness of a civilization which expressed itself
in a constant excess of consumption over production. Naturally enough,
under such conditions, the imperial system became more and more what
it really was from the first, a vast machine. It was not a league of
cooperating units, each containing a vital principle of growth, and
furnishing the power of recovery from disaster. Its apathetic parts
looked passively to the centre for guidance or relief, depending on the
perfection of a government whose imperfection was assured by attempting
a task beyond the reach of human faculty and virtue. The exposure of
the empire’s weakness came about through collision with the forces of
northern barbarism. What a machine could do, that it did, and its final
failure was due to maladies that made vain all efforts to renew its
internal strength.

The wars with the northern barbarians brought out with singular clearness
two important facts, already known but not sufficiently taken into
account. First, that the enemy were increasing in numbers while the
people of the empire were in most parts stationary or even declining.
Bloody victories, when gained, did practically nothing to redress the
balance. Secondly, that at the back of this embarrassing situation lay
a food-question of extreme seriousness and complexity. More and more
food was needed for the armies, and the rustics of the empire, even when
fitted for military service, could not be spared from the farms without
danger to the food-supply. The demands of the commissariat were probably
far greater than we might on the face of it suppose; for an advance into
the enemy’s territory did not ease matters. Little or nothing was found
to eat: indeed it was the pressure of a growing population on the means
of subsistence that drove the hungry German tribes to face the Roman
sword in quest of abundant food and the wine and oil of the South and
West. The attempt of Marcus and others after him, to solve the problems
of the moment by enlisting barbarians in Roman armies, was no permanent
solution. The aliens too had to be fed, and their pay in money could not
be deferred. Meanwhile the taxation of the empire inevitably grew, and
the productive industries had to stagger along under heavier burdens.
The progressive increase of these is sufficiently illustrated in the
history of _indictiones_. At first an _indictio_ was no more than an
occasional[1546] impost of so much corn levied by imperial proclamation
on landed properties in order to meet exceptional scarcity in Rome.
But it was in addition to the regular _tributum_, and was of course
most likely to occur in years when scarcity prevailed. No wonder it was
already felt onerous[1547] in the time of Trajan. Pressure on imperial
resources caused it not only to become more frequent, and eventually
normal: it was extended[1548] to include other products, and became a
regular burden of almost universal application, and ended by furnishing
a new chronological unit, the Indiction-period of 15 years.

That agriculture, already none too prosperous, suffered heavily under
this capricious impost in the second century, seems to me a fact beyond
all doubt. And, not being then a general imperial tax, it fell upon those
provinces that were still flourishing producers of corn. Debasement of
currency already lowered the value of money-taxes, and tempted emperors
to extend the system of dues in kind. Under Diocletian and Galerius
things came to a head. Vast increase of taxation was called for under
the new system, and it was mainly _taxation in kind_. Already the
failure of agriculture was notorious, and attempts had been made to
enforce cultivation of derelict lands. The new taxation only aggravated
present evils, and in despair of milder measures Constantine attached
the _coloni_ to the soil. Important as the legal foundation of the
later serf-colonate, this law is historically still more important as a
recognition of past failure which nothing had availed to check. He saw
no way of preventing a general stampede from the farms save to forbid it
as illegal, and to employ the whole machinery of the empire in enforcing
the new law. This policy was only a part of the general tendency to fix
everything in a rigid framework, to make all occupations hereditary, that
became normal in the later Empire. The Codes are a standing record of the
principle that the remedy for failure of legislation was more legislation
of the same kind. Hard-pressed emperors needed all the resources
they could muster, particularly food. They had no breathing-space to
try whether more freedom might not promote enterprise and increase
production, even had such a policy come within their view. Hence the
cramping crystallizing process went on with the certainty of fate. The
government, unable to develope existing industry, simply squeezed it to
exhaustion.

How came it that the government was able to do this? How came it that
agricultural tenants could be converted into stationary serfs without
causing a general upheaval[1549] and immediate dissolution of the
empire? Mainly, I think, because the act of Constantine was no more
than a recognition _de iure_ of a condition already created _de facto_
by a long course of servilizing influences. Also because it was the
apparent interest, not only of the imperial treasury but of the great
proprietors generally, to tie down to the soil[1550] the cultivators of
their estates. Labour was now more valuable than land. In corn-growing
Africa the importance attached to the task-work of sub-tenants was a
confession of this. And, law or no law, things had to move in one or
other direction. Either the landlord and head-lessee had to win further
control of the tenants, or the tenants must become less dependent. Only
the former alternative was possible in the circumstances; and the full
meaning of the change that turned _de facto_ dependence into legal
constraint may be stated as a recognition of the _colonus_ as labourer
rather than tenant. Whether the settlement of barbarians as domiciled
aliens in some Provinces under strict conditions of farm-labour had
anything to do with the creation of this new semi-servile status, seems
hardly to be decided on defective evidence. At all events it cannot have
hindered it. And we must make full allowance for the effect of various
conditions in various Provinces. If we rightly suppose that the position
of _coloni_ had been growing weaker for some time before the act of
Constantine, this does not imply that the process was due to the same
causes operating alike in all parts of the empire in the same degree. The
evidence of the Theodosian Code shews many local differences of phenomena
in the fourth and fifth centuries; and it is not credible that there was
a greater uniformity in the conditions of the preceding age. Laws might
aim at uniformity, but they could not alter facts.

My conclusion therefore is that the general character of the imperial
system was the main cause of the later serf-colonate. However much
the degradation of free farm-tenants, or the admission of slaves to
tenancies, or the settlement of barbarians under conditions of service,
may have contributed to the result, it was the mechanical nature of the
system as a whole that gave effect to them all. After Trajan the rulers
of the empire became more and more conscious that the problem before
them was one of conservation, and that extension was at an end. Hadrian
saw this, and strove to perfect the internal organization. By the time
of Aurelian it was found necessary to surrender territory as a further
measure of security. We can hardly doubt that under such conditions the
machine of internal administration operated more mechanically than ever.
Then, when the reforms of Diocletian made fresh taxation necessary to
defray their cost, an agricultural crisis was produced by the turning of
the imperial screw. The hierarchy of officials justified their existence
by squeezing an assured revenue out of a population unable to resist
but able to remove. There was no other source of revenue to take the
place of the land: moreover, it was agricultural produce in kind that
was required. Therefore the central bureaucracy, unchecked by any public
opinion, did after its wont. In that selfish and servile world each one
took care of his own skin. Compulsion was the rule: the _coloni_ must be
made to produce food: therefore they must be bound fast to the soil, or
the empire would starve—and the officials with it.

                  ADDITIONAL NOTES TO CHAPTER L.

    I cannot lose this opportunity of referring to a very
    interesting little book by M. Augé-Laribé, _L’évolution de la
    France agricole_ [Paris 1912]. Much of it bears directly on
    the labour-question, and sets forth the difficulties hindering
    its solution. It is peculiarly valuable to a student of the
    question in the ancient world, because it lays great stress on
    the effect of causes arising from modern conditions. Causes
    operating in both ancient and modern times are thereby made
    more readily and clearly perceptible. Such modern influences
    in particular as the vast development of transport, the
    concentration of machine-industries in towns, and the constant
    attraction of better and more continuous wage-earning, by which
    the rustic is drawn to urban centres, are highly significant.
    The difference from ancient conditions is so great in degree
    that it practically almost amounts to a difference in kind. So
    too in the material resources of agriculture: the development
    of farm-machinery has superseded much hand-labour, while
    Science has increased the possible returns from a given portion
    of soil.

    Most significant of all from my point of view is the author’s
    insistence on the _irregularity_ of wage-earning in rustic
    life as an active cause of the flitting of wage-earners to the
    towns. This brings it home to a student that a system of rustic
    slavery implies a set of conditions incompatible with such an
    economic migration; and also that the employment of slaves by
    urban craftsmen would not leave many eligible openings for
    immigrant rustics. It is fully consistent with my view that the
    wage-earning rustic was a rare figure in the Greco-Roman world.

    It is perhaps in the remedies proposed by the author for
    present evils (and for the resulting depopulation of the
    countryside) that the contrast of ancient and modern is
    most clearly marked. Bureaucratic the French administrative
    system may be: but it is not the expression of a despotism
    that enslaves its citizens in the frantic effort to maintain
    itself against pressure from without. For individuals and
    organizations are free to think speak and act, and so to
    promote what seems likely to do good. Initiative and invention
    are not deadened by the fear that betterment will only serve as
    a pretext for increase of burdens. Stationary by instinct the
    French peasant proprietor may be: but he is free to move if he
    will, and no one dare propose to tie him to the soil by law.

    Nor can I omit a reference to a paper of the late Prof Pelham
    on _The Imperial domains and the Colonate_ (1890, in volume of
    Essays, Oxford 1911).

    The simplicity of the solution there offered is most
    attractive, and the general value of the treatise great. But
    I do not think it a final solution of the problem. Not only
    are there variations of detail in the domains known to us from
    the African inscriptions (some of them found since 1890). That
    some of the regulations may have been taken over from those
    of former private owners is a point not considered. And there
    is no mention of the notable requisition of the services of
    _coloni_ as mere retainers, to which Caesar refers without
    comment (above pp 183, 254). Therefore, while I welcome the
    proposition that the system of the Imperial domains had much to
    do with the creation of the later Colonate, I still think that
    earlier and more deep-seated causes cannot safely be ignored.
    Perhaps this is partly because I am looking at the matter from
    a labour point of view.




FROM DIOCLETIAN


LI. GENERAL INTRODUCTION.

If we desire to treat History as the study of causation in the affairs of
mankind—and this is its most fruitful task—we shall find no more striking
illustration of its difficulties than the agricultural system of the
later Roman Empire. In the new model of Diocletian and Constantine we see
the imperial administration reorganized in new forms[1551] deliberately
adopted: policy expresses itself, after a century of disturbance, in a
clear breach with the past. But, when Constantine in 332 legislates[1552]
to prevent _coloni_ from migrating, he refers to a class of men who are
not their own masters but subject to control (_iuris alieni_), though
he distinguishes them from slaves. Evidently he is not creating a new
class: his intention is to prevent an existing class from evading its
present responsibilities. They are by the fact of their birth attached
as cultivators to their native soil. With this tie of _origo_[1553] goes
liability to a certain proportion of imperial tax (_capitatio_). This
is mentioned as a matter of course. Now we know that such serf-_coloni_
formed at least a large part of the rustic population under the later
Empire. We cannot but see that the loss of the power of free migration is
the vital difference that marks off these tied farmers from the tenant
farmers of an earlier period, the class whom Columella advised landlords
to retain if possible. For these men cannot move on if they would. How
came they to be in this strange condition, in fact neither slave nor
free, so that Constantine had merely to crystallize relations already
existing[1554] and the institution of serf-tenancy became a regular
part of the system? If we are to form any notion of the conditions of
farm labour in this period, we must form some notion of the causes that
produced the later or dependent colonate. And this is no simple matter:
on few subjects has the divergence of opinions been more marked than on
this. I have stated my own conclusions above, and further considerations
are adduced in this chapter.

Our chief source of evidence is the collection of legal acts of the
Christian emperors issued by authority in the year 438, and known as the
_codex Theodosianus_. It covers a period of more than a hundred years,
and innumerable references to the land-questions attest the continual
anxiety of the imperial government to secure adequate cultivation of
every possible acre of land. Contemporary history may suggest motives
for this nervousness. The increased expenses of the court and the
administrative system made it necessary to raise more taxes than ever for
the civil services. The armies, now mainly composed of Germans and other
barbarians, were necessary for imperial defence, but very costly to equip
pay and feed. Whether they were mercenaries drawing wages, or aliens
settled as Roman subjects within the empire on lands held by tenure
of military service, they were either a burden on the treasury or a
doubtful element of the population that must at all costs be kept in good
humour. On a few occasions Roman victories furnished numbers of barbarian
prisoners to the slave-market. These would be dispersed over various
districts, generally at some distance from the troubled frontiers, and
the rustic slaves of whom we hear were doubtless in great part procured
in this way. But that the rustic population consisted largely of actual
slaves we have no reason to believe. Of estates worked on a vast scale
by slave labour we hear nothing. Naturally; for the social and economic
conditions favourable to that system had long passed away. Slaves were
no longer plentiful, markets were no longer free. Under the Empire, the
pride of great landlords needed a strong mixture of caution; under a
greedy or spendthrift emperor the display of material wealth was apt to
be dangerous. In the century of confusion before Diocletian agriculture
had been much interrupted in many parts of the empire, and much land had
gone out of cultivation. So serious was the situation in the later part
of that period, that Aurelian[1555] imposed upon municipal senates the
burden of providing for the cultivation of derelict farms.

When a taxpayer is required to pay a fixed amount in a stable currency,
he knows his liability. So long as he can meet it, any surplus income
remains in his hands, and he has a fair chance of improving his economic
position by thrift. If what the state really wants is (say) corn, it
can use its tax-revenue to purchase corn in the open market. But this
assumes that the producer is free to stand out for the best price he
can get, and that he will be paid in money on the purchasing power of
which he can rely for his own needs. This last condition had ceased to
exist[1556] in the Roman empire. Not to mention earlier tamperings with
the currency, since the middle of the third century its state had been
deplorable. Things had now gone so far that the value of the fixed money
taxes seriously reduced the income derived from them: the government was
literally paid in its own coin. The policy of Diocletian was to extend an
old practice of exacting payment in kind, and this became the principal
method[1557] of imperial taxation. We must bear in mind that the supply
of corn for the city of Rome, the _annona urbis_, went on as before,
though the practical importance of Rome was steadily sinking. Diocletian
made it no longer the residence of emperors, and Constantine founded
another capital in the East: but Rome was still fed by corn-tributes
from the Provinces, chiefly from Africa and Egypt. When the New Rome on
the Bosporus was fully equipped as an imperial capital, Egypt was made
liable for the corn-supply of the Constantinopolitan populace. Old Rome
had then to rely almost entirely on Africa, with occasional help from
other sources. Italy itself[1558] was now reduced to the common level,
cut up into provinces, and liable for furnishing supplies of food. But
it was divided into two separate regions: the northern, officially named
_Italia_, or _annonariae regiones_, in which a good deal of corn was
grown, had to deliver its _annona_ at Mediolanum (Milan) the new imperial
headquarters: the southern, _suburbicariae_ (or _urbicariae_) _regiones_,
in which little corn was grown, sent supplies of pigs cattle wine
firewood lime etc to Rome. The northern _annona_, like that from other
provinces, helped to maintain military forces and the host of officials
employed by the government. For it soon became the practice to pay
salaries in kind. In the pitiful state of the currency this rude method
offered the best guarantee for receipt of a definite value.

Unhappily this exaction and distribution in kind was at best a wasteful
process. At worst it was simply ruinous. The empire was subject
to constant menace of attack, and was in dire need of the largest
possible income raised on the most economical system. If the ultimate
basis of imperial strength was to be found in the food-producers, it
was all-important to give the farming classes a feeling of security
sufficient to encourage industry and enterprise, and at all costs to
avoid reducing them to despair. Nor was the new census as designed by
Diocletian on the face of it an unjust and evil institution. Taking
account of arable lands and of the persons employed in cultivating them,
it aimed at creating a fixed number[1559] of agricultural units each of
which should be liable to furnish the same amount of yearly dues in kind.
But it is obvious that to carry out this doctrinaire scheme with uniform
neatness and precision was not possible. To deal fairly with agriculture
a minute attention to local differences and special peculiarities was
necessary, and this attention could not be given on so vast a scale.
Perhaps careful observation and correction of errors might have produced
a reasonable degree of perfection in a long period of unbroken peace:
but no such period was at hand. The same strain that drove the imperial
government to the new taxation also prevented any effective control of
its working.

It is perhaps inevitable that the exaction of dues in kind should lead
to abuses. At all events, abuses in this department were no new thing:
the sufferings of such Provinces as Sicily and Asia were notorious in the
time of the Republic. A stricter control had made the state of things
much better in the first two centuries of the Empire. The exploitation
of the Provincials was generally checked, and the imperial government
was not as yet driven by desperate financial straits to turn extortioner
itself. Caracalla’s law of 212, extending the Roman franchise[1560] to
all free inhabitants, was a symptom of conscious need, for it brought
all estates under the Roman succession-tax. At the same time it did
away with the old distinction between the ruling Roman people and the
subject nationalities: henceforth, wherever there was oppression within
the Roman world, it necessarily fell upon Roman[1561] citizens. Time had
been when the Roman citizen, free to move into any part of the Roman
dominions and to acquire property there[1562] under protection of Roman
law, made full use of the opportunities afforded him, to the disadvantage
of the subject natives. Now all alike were the helpless subjects of a
government that they could neither reform nor supersede; a government
whose one leading idea was to bring all institutions into fixed grooves
in which they should move mechanically year after year, unsusceptible of
growth or decay. True, the plan was absurd, and some few observers may
have detected its absurdity. But the power of challenging centralized
officialism and evoking expression of public opinion, never more than
rudimentary in the Roman state, was now simply extinct. Things had come
to such a pass that, speaking generally, a citizen’s choice lay between
two alternatives. Either he must bear an active part in the system
that was squeezing out the vital economic forces of the empire, making
whenever possible a profit for himself out of a salary or illicit gains;
or he must submit passively to all such extortions as the system, worked
by men whose duty and interest alike tended to make them merciless, was
certain to inflict. The oppressors, though numerous, could only be few
in proportion to the whole free population. Therefore the vast majority
stood officially condemned to lives of penury and wretchedness. The
system became more hard-set and the outlook more hopeless with the lapse
of time.

The dues exacted from the various parts of the empire varied in
quality[1563] according to local conditions, and to some extent in
methods of collection. In the frontier Provinces the quantity was
sometimes reduced[1564] by remissions, when a district ravaged by
invaders was relieved for a few years that it might recover its normal
productiveness. The details of these variations are beyond the scope
of the present inquiry. The general principle underlying the whole
system was the fixing of taxation-units equal in liability, and the
organizing of collection in municipal groups. Each municipal town
or _civitas_ was the administrative centre of a district, and stood
charged in the imperial ledgers as liable for the returns from a
certain number of units, this number being that recorded as existing at
the last quinquennial census. For the collection the chief municipal
authorities were responsible; and they had to hand over the amount due
to the imperial authorities, whether they had received it in full or
not. Already burdened with strictly municipal liabilities, the members
of municipal senates (_curiales_) were crushed by this additional and
incalculable pressure. Unable to resist, they generally took the course
of so using their functions and powers as to protect their own interests
as far as possible. One obvious precaution was to see that the number
of taxable units[1565] in their district was not fixed too high by the
census officials. This precaution was certainly not overlooked, and
success in keeping down the number may well have been the chief reason
why the system was able to go on so long. The _curiales_ were mostly
considerable landlords, residing in their town and letting their land to
tenants. But there were other landlords, smaller men, some also resident
in the towns, others in the country. We still hear of men farming
land[1566] of their own, and it seems that some of these held and farmed
other land also, as _coloni_ of larger landlords. When any question arose
as to the number of units for the tax on which this or that farm was
liable, it is clear that the interests of different classes might easily
clash. And the _curiales_ undoubtedly took care[1567] that their own and
those of their friends did not suffer.

These remarks imply that the system practically worked in favour of the
richer classes[1568] as against the poorer. And so it certainly did, not
only in the time of revision at the census each fifth year, but on other
occasions. If an invasion or some other great disaster led the emperor
to grant temporary relief, this would normally take the form of reducing
the number of taxable units in the district for a certain period. But
the local authorities were left to apportion this reduction[1569] among
the several estates, and the poor farmers had no representative to see
that they got their fair share of relief. Moreover, outside taxation,
the farmers were often subjected to heavy burdens and damage by the
irregular requisitions of imperial officials. For instance, the staff
of the imperial post-service (_cursus publicus_)[1570] were a terror.
They pressed the goods of farmers into the service of their department
on various pretexts, and exacted labour on upkeep of roads and stations.
For their tyranny there was no effective compensation or redress. Like
other officials, they could be bought off by bribes: but this meant that
the various exactions[1571] were shifted from the shoulders of the rich
to those of the poor. Another iniquity, the revival of a very old[1572]
abuse, was connected with the question of transport, an important
consideration in the case of dues in kind, often bulky. For instance, in
the case of corn, the place at which it had to be delivered might easily
count for more in estimating the actual pressure of the burden than the
amount of grain levied. In making the arrangements for delivery there
were openings for favouritism and bribery. Circumstances varied greatly
in various parts of the empire. In some Provinces delivery was made at a
military depot within easy reach. Transport by sea from Egypt or Africa
was carried on by gilds[1573] of shippers, who became more and more
organized and regulated by law. But in many parts good roads were few,
and laid out for strategic reasons; the country roads inconvenient and
rough: and for transport in bulk the post-service provided no machinery
available for the use of private persons.

It is not necessary here to follow out in detail all the particular
discomforts and grievances of the farming classes under the system
devised by Diocletian and developed by his successors. Enough has
been said to shew that they were great, and to remove all ground for
wondering that the area of arable land actually under tillage, and
with it population, continued to decline. Constantine’s law confirming
the bondage of _coloni_ to the soil by forbidding movement was the
confession of a widespread evil, but no remedy. Repeated legislation
to the same purpose only recorded and continued the failure. When all
the resources of evasion were exhausted, the pauperized serf fled to
a town and depended for a living on the pitiful doles of private or
ecclesiastical charity, or turned brigand and took precarious toll
of those who still had something to lose. In either case he was an
additional burden on a society that already had more than it could bear.
In 382 we find an attempt[1574] made to put down ‘sturdy beggars.’ The
law rewarded anyone who procured the conviction of such persons by
handing over the offenders to him. An ex-slave became the approver’s own
slave, and one who had nothing of his own beyond his freeborn quality
was granted to him as his _colonus_ for life. But this law seems to have
been ineffectual like others. Desertion of farms might to some extent be
checked, but mendicity and brigandage remained.

There was however another movement, later in time and less in volume,
but not less serious as affecting the practical working of the imperial
machine. With the increase of poverty life in municipal towns became less
attractive. Local eminence was no longer an object of ambition; for to
local burdens, once cheerfully borne, was now added a load of imperial
responsibilities which lay heavy on all men of property, and which they
could neither shake off nor control. In hope of evading them, well-to-do
citizens took refuge[1575] in the country, either on estates of their own
or under the protection of great landlords already settled there. But to
allow this would mean the depletion of the local senates (_curiae_) on
whose services as revenue-collectors the financial system of the empire
depended. To prevent men qualified for the position of _curiales_ from
escaping that duty was the aim of legislation[1576] which by repeated
enactments confessed its own failure. That there were country magnates,
men of influence (_potentes_), whose protection might seem able to
screen municipal defaulters, is a point to be noted. They were the great
_possessores_[1577] (a term no longer applied to small men), who held
large estates organized on a sort of manorial model, and sometimes ruled
them like little principalities, territorial lordships[1578] standing
in direct relations with the central authorities and not hampered
by inclusion in the general municipal scheme. Such ‘peculiars’ had
existed under the earlier Empire, and evidently continued to exist: the
Crown-lands of the emperors, especially in Africa, were the most signal
cases. But the great private Possessor could not secure to his domain
the various exemptions[1579] that emperors conferred on theirs. He had
to collect and pay over[1580] the dues from his estate, as a municipal
magistrate did from the district round his town-centre. But he had a more
immediate and personal interest in the wellbeing of all his tenants and
dependants, whose presence and prosperity gave to his land by far the
greater part[1581] of its value.

That territorial magnates should be free to build up a perhaps dangerous
power in various corners of the empire by gathering dependants round
them, could hardly be viewed with approval by the jealousy of emperors.
Not only was the system of letting land in parcels to tenants spreading,
but the power of the landlords over them was increasing, long before
Constantine took the final step of treating them as attached permanently
to the soil. Whether they were the landlord’s free tenants who had
gradually lost through economic weakness the effective use of freedom;
or small freeholders who had found it worth their while to part with
their holdings to a big man and become his tenants for the sake of
enjoying his protection; or former slaves to whom small farms had been
entrusted on various conditions; they were in a sort of economic bondage.
Doubtless most of them lived from hand to mouth, but we have no reason
to believe that poverty, so long as they had plenty to live on, was the
motive[1582] that made them wish to give up their holdings and try their
luck elsewhere. It was the cruel pressure of Diocletian’s new taxation,
and the army of officials employed to enforce it, that drove them to
despair. A contemporary witness[1583] tells us, referring to this very
matter, ‘the excess of receivers over givers was becoming so marked
that farms were being abandoned, and tillages falling to woodland, the
resources of the tenants being exhausted by the hugeness[1584] of the
imposts.’ And this evidence does not stand alone. So Constantine sought a
remedy in prevention of movement, binding down the tenants to the soil.
Henceforth the land to which a _colonus_[1585] was attached by birth, and
the _colonus_ himself, were to be legally and economically inseparable.
Attempts at evading the new rule were persistently met by later[1586]
legislation. The motive of such attempts may be found by remembering
that depopulation was steadily lowering the value of land and raising
that of labour. If an individual landlord could add to the value of his
own estate by getting more _coloni_ settled on it, withdrawn from other
estates, he might profit by the transaction: but the government, whose
policy was to keep the greatest possible area under cultivation, could
not allow one part to be denuded of labourers to suit the interest of the
owner of another part.

When the law stepped in to deprive the tenant, already far gone in
dependence on his landlord, of such freedom of movement as he still
retained, it is remarkable that rustic slaves were not at the same time
legally attached to the soil. That inconvenience was caused by masters
selling them when and where they chose, is shewn by Constantine’s
law[1587] of 327, allowing such sales to take place only within the
limits of the Province where they had been employed. No doubt their
removal upset the arrangements for that part of a taxable unit in
which the number of adult heads[1588] was taken into account, and
so had to be checked. But it seems not to have been till the time
of Valentinian[1589], somewhere between 367 and 375, that the sale
of a farm-slave off the land was directly prohibited, like that of
a _colonus_. In referring to this matter, the significance of the
difference of dates is thus brought out[1590] by Seeck: ‘That this
measure was carried through much sooner in the case of the small farmers
than in that of the farm-slaves, is very characteristic of the spirit
of that age. Where court favour is the deciding factor that governs
the entire policy, the government is even more reluctant to limit the
proprietary rights of the great landlord[1591] than the liberties of
the small man.’ This is very true, but we must not forget that in both
cases the binding of the labourer to the soil did in fact restrict the
landlord’s freedom of disposal. He as well as his dependants came under
a system not designed to promote his private convenience or interest,
but to guarantee a maximum of total cultivation in the interest of the
empire as a whole. So we find that he was not allowed[1592] to raise at
will the rents of his tenants: they could sue their landlord (a right
which in practice was probably not worth much), and even when this right
was restricted[1593] in 396 they still retained it in respect of unfair
increases of rent and criminal cases. So too, if he acquired extra
slaves, either by receiving them as volunteers from derelict farms or
in virtue of an imperial grant, it was strictly ordained[1594] that
such acquisition carried with it the tax-liability for the whole of the
derelict land. The landlord was therefore kept firmly in the grip of
the central power, and not left free to build up a little principality
by consolidating at will all the labour-resources that he could annex
as dependants. Moreover he was watched by a host of imperial agents and
spies whose interests could only be reconciled with his own by the costly
method of recurrent bribery.

When we return to the main question of the actual farm-labour, and ask
who toiled with their own hands to raise crops, we find ourselves in a
curious position. The evidence, whether legal or literary, leaves us
in no doubt that the tenant farmer of this period was normally himself
a labourer. And yet it is not easy to cite passages in which this is
directly affirmed. The pompous and affected language of the imperial
laws is throughout a bad medium for conveying simple facts; nor was the
question, who did the work, of any interest to the central authority,
concerned solely with the regular exaction of the apportioned dues. The
real proof that _coloni_, whether still holding some land of their own
or merely tenants, and _inquilini_, whether solely barbarian dependants
or not, were actual handworkers, is to be found in legitimate inference
from certain facts. First, the increase in the value of labour compared
with the decline in that of land. The binding of tenant to soil was a
confession of this. Secondly, the general poverty of the farmers[1595]
and their helplessness against oppression and wrong. Of this the
description of Salvian gives a striking, if rhetorical, picture, and it
is implied in many laws designed[1596] for their protection. That persons
in so weak an economic position could have carried on their business
as mere directors of slave-labour is surely inconceivable: and we are
to remember that not only they themselves but their families also were
bound to the soil. It was their presence, that is to say their labour,
that gave value to the land, and so paid the taxes. Hence it was that in
forming taxable units (_capita_) it was generally the practice to include
in the reckoning[1597] not only the productive area (_iugatio_) but also
the ‘heads’ that stocked it (_capitatio_). In other words, productiveness
must in the interest of the state be actual, not merely potential.

The importance of keeping the real locally-bound _coloni_ strictly to
their business of food-production was fully recognized in the regulations
for recruiting the armies. Landlords, required to furnish[1598] recruits,
were free to name some of their _coloni_ for that purpose. But there
was no fear that they would be eager to do this, for the work of their
tenants was what gave value to their properties. And the imperial
officers charged with recruiting duty were ordered[1599] (and this in
400, when the need of soldiers was extreme) not to accept fugitive
tenants belonging to an estate (_indigenis_): these no doubt if found
were to be returned to their lords. The military levy was to fall upon
sons of veterans, for in this class as in others no effort was spared
to make the ways of life hereditary; or on wastrels (_vagos_)[1600], of
whom the laws often make mention; or generally on persons manifestly
by the circumstances of their birth (_origo_) liable to army service.
Here we have the service still in principle confined to freemen. But
it is not to be doubted that many a slave (and these would be nearly
all rustic slaves) passed muster with officers hasting to make up their
tale of men, and so entered the army. At a much later date (529) we find
Justinian[1601] contemplating cases of slaves recruited with the consent
of their owners, in short furnished as recruits. He enacts that such men
are to be declared _ingenui_[1602], that is freeborn not freedmen, the
master losing all rights over them: but, if they are efficient soldiers,
they are to remain in the service. And the power of commuting[1603]
the obligation of furnishing a recruit for a payment of money, which
was to some extent allowed, introduced a method of recruiting[1604] by
purchase. A recruit being demanded, it did not follow that the emperor
got either the particular man (inspected of course and passed as fit) or
a fixed cash-commutation. The recruiting officer conveniently happened
to have a man or two at disposal, picked up in the course of his tour.
The landlord, anxious to keep his own staff intact, came to terms with
the officer for one of these as substitute. These officers knew when
they could drive hard bargains, and did not lose their chances. In a
law of 375, this system is directly referred to, and an attempt is made
to regulate it[1605] on an equitable footing. To abolish it was clearly
impossible. Eventually the state undertook to work it officially, and
bought its own ‘bodies’ (_corpora_, like σώματα, of slaves) with the
composition-money or _aurum_ _temonarium_. That some of these ‘bodies’
were escaped slaves is highly probable. Some may have been stray
barbarians, not included in the various barbarian corps which more and
more came to form the backbone of the Roman army. But the majority would
probably be indigent wretches to whom any change seemed better than the
miserable lives open to them in the meanest functions of the decaying
civilization of the towns. In any case such recruits[1606] would be but a
poor substitute for the pick of the rustic population.

The same anxiety to spare the rustics unnecessary exactions, that
they might not sink under their present burdens, appears in other
regulations. The subordinates employed in the public services such as
the Post, or as attendants on functionaries, were tempted to ease their
own duties by demanding contributions from the helpless countryfolk.
This we find forbidden[1607] in 321 as interfering with the farmers’
right to procure and carry home things required for agriculture. So
too a whole Title[1608] in the _Codex_ is devoted to the prevention of
_superexactiones_, a form of extortion often practised by officials,
chiefly by the use of false weights and measures or by foul play with the
official receipts. The laws forbidding practices of this kind seem to
belong to the latter part of the fourth century and the earlier part of
the fifth. But the evil was clearly of old standing, and the laws almost
certainly vain. That illicit exactions were a particular affliction of
the poorer rustics, who could not bribe the officials, is confessed[1609]
by a law of 362, which ordains that the burdens of supplying beasts
fodder etc for service of the Post, upkeep of the roads and so forth,
are to be laid on all _possessores_ alike. Further enactments follow in
401 and 408. But these rules for equitable distribution of burdens, even
if carried out, only spread them over all landowners and _coloni_. All
the upper ranks[1610] of the imperial service carried exemption from
_sordida munera_ in some form or other, and personal grants of exemption
were often granted as a favour. It is true that such exemption only
extended to the life of the grantee, that exemptions were revocable, and
that in course of time extreme necessities led to revocations. But all
this did not operate to relieve the unhappy rustic on whom the whole
imperial fabric rested. The rich might have to lose their privileges, but
it was too late for the poor to gain a benefit. That the underlings of
provincial governors were a terror to farmers, levying on them illicit
services and generally blackmailing them for their own profit, is clear
from the law[1611] (somewhere 368-373) announcing severe punishment for
the offence and declaring that it had become a regular practice. The law
of 328, enacting[1612] that no farmer (_agricola_) was to be impressed
for special service in the seasons of seed-time or harvest, is on rather
a different footing. It expressly justifies the prohibition on the ground
of agricultural necessity: in short, it is not to protect the farmer,
but, to leave him no excuse for not producing food.

A great critic[1613] has commented severely on the intellectual
stagnation that fell upon the Roman empire and was one of the most
effective causes of its decline. That literature fed upon the past and
dwindled into general imbecility is commonly recognized: but the lack
of material inventions and the paucity of improvements is perhaps not
less significant than the decay of literature and art. The department of
agriculture was no exception to this sterile traditionality. Since the
days of Varro there had been no considerable change. So far as labour is
concerned, the system of Columella can hardly be called an advance; for
it employs directly none but slave labour, a resource already beginning
to fail, and causing landlords to seek help from the development of
tenancies. In modern times the dearness of labour has stimulated human
ingenuity to produce machines by which the efficiency of human labour
is increased and therefore fewer hands required for a given output. But
in the world under the Roman supremacy centuries went by with hardly
any modification of the mechanical equipment. A small exception may
perhaps be found in a sort of rudimentary reaping-machine. It was briefly
referred to by the elder Pliny[1614] in the first century of our era,
and described by Palladius in the fourth. The device was in use on
the large estates in the lowlands of Gaul, and was perhaps a Gaulish
invention. It is said to have been a labour-saving[1615] appliance. From
the description it seems to have been clumsy; and, since it cut off the
ears and left the straw standing, it was only suited to farms on which
no special use was made of the straw. Its structure (for it was driven
by an ox from behind) must have made it unworkable on sloping ground.
That we hear nothing of its general adoption may be due to these or
other defects. But I believe there is no record of attempts to improve
the original design. The lack of interest in improvement of tools has
been noted as a phenomenon accompanying the dependence on slave labour.
And when under the Roman empire we see the free tenant passing into the
condition of a serf-tenant, we are witnessing a process that steadily
tended to reduce him to the moral labour-level of the apathetic and
hopeless slave. To make the agriculture of a district more prosperous
was to attract the attention of greedy officials. To resist their illicit
extortions was to attract the attention of the central government, whose
growing needs were ever tempting it to squeeze more and more out of its
subjects. Why then should the rustic, tied to the soil, trouble himself
to seek more economical methods, the profits of which, if ever realized,
he was not himself likely to enjoy?


LII. LIBANIUS.

In order to get so far as possible a living picture of the conditions of
rustic life and labour we must glean the scattered notices preserved to
us in the writers of the period of decline. Due allowance must be made
for the general artificiality and rhetorical bent of authors trained in
the still fashionable schools of composition and style. For even private
letters were commonly written as models destined eventually to be read
and admired by the public, while in controversial works and public
addresses the tendency to attitudinize was dominant. The circulation
of literary trivialities and exchange of cheap compliments, especially
prevalent in Gaul, was kept up to the last by self-satisfied cliques
when the barbarians were already established in the heart of the empire.
Nevertheless valuable sidelights on questions of fact are thrown from
several points of view. This evidence agrees with that drawn from the
imperial laws, and is in so far better for our purpose that it deals
almost exclusively with the present. When it looks to the future, it is
in the form of petition or advice; while the normal substance of the laws
is to confess the existence of monstrous abuses by threatening offenders
with penalties ever more and more severe, and enjoining reforms that no
penalties could enforce. A writer very characteristic of his age (about
315-400) is the ‘sophist’ =Libanius=, who passed most of his later years
at Antioch, the luxurious chief city of the East. For matters under his
immediate observation he is a good authority, and may help us to form
a notion of the extent to which imperial ordinances were practically
operative in the eastern parts of the empire.

Two of the ‘orations,’ or written addresses, of Libanius are particularly
interesting as appeals to the emperor Theodosius for redress of
malpractices affecting the rustic population and impairing the financial
resources of the empire. The earlier[1616] (about 385) exposes gross
misdeeds of the city magistrates of Antioch. What with the falling of
old houses and clearing of sites for new buildings there were great
quantities of mixed rubbish to be removed and deposited elsewhere.
Apparently there was now no sufficient staff of public slaves at
disposal; at all events the city authorities resorted to illegal means
for procuring the removal. When the country folk came into town to
dispose of their produce, the magistrates requisitioned their carts asses
mules (and themselves as drivers) for this work. Thus the time of the
poor rustics was wasted, their carts and sacks damaged, and they and
their beasts sent back to their homes in a state of utter exhaustion.
No law empowered the city magnates to act thus. From small beginnings a
sort of usage had been created, which nothing short of imperial ordinance
could now break and abolish. That the magistrates were conscious of doing
wrong was shewn by what they avoided doing. They did not impress slaves
or carts from houses in the city. They did not exact like services from
the military or powerful landlords. Nor did they lay the burden on the
estates[1617] of the municipality, the rents from which were part of
the revenues of Antioch. Favour is only justified by equity; and there
is, says Libanius, no equity in sparing the luxurious rich by ruining
the poor. So he entreats his most gracious[1618] Majesty to protect the
farms as much as the cities, or rather more. For the country is in fact
the foundation on which cities rest. Without it they could never have
existed: and now it is on the rise and fall of rural wellbeing that urban
prosperity depends. This appeal speaks for itself. But it is significant
that the skilled pleader thinks it wise to end on a note of imperial
interest. ‘Moreover, Sire, it is from the country that your tribute
is drawn. It is to the cities that you address your orders[1619] for
taxation, but the cities have to raise it from the country. Therefore, to
protect the farmers is to preserve your interests, and to maltreat the
farmers is to betray them.’

In the oration numbered 47 the abuse dealt with is of a very different
kind. The date is 391 or 392, and the subject is the ‘protections’
(_patrocinia_)[1620] of villages. The pressure of imperial taxation
and the abuses accompanying its collection had driven the villagers
to seek help in resisting the visits of the tax-gatherers. This help
was generally found in placing the village under the protection of
some powerful person, commonly a retired soldier, who acted as a
rallying-centre and leader, probably in most cases backed by some
retainers of his own class. Of course these men did not undertake
opposition to the public authorities for nothing. But it seems that
their exactions were, at least in the earlier stages, found to be less
burdensome than those of the official collectors. The situation thus
created was as follows. The local senators (_curiales_) whose turn it
was to collect the dues from the district under their municipality (a
duty that they were not allowed to shirk) went out to the villages for
the purpose. They were beaten off[1621] by use of force, often wounded
as well as foiled. They were still bound to pay over the tax, which they
had not received, to the imperial treasury. In these latter days default
of payment rendered them liable to cruel scourging. So the unhappy
_curiales_ had to sell their own property to make up the amount due.
The loss of their means strikes them out of the _curia_ for lack of the
legal qualification. And this was not only a loss to their particular
city: it damaged imperial interests, bound up as the whole system was
with maintaining unimpaired the supply of qualified _curiales_. The evil
of these ‘protections’ was, according to Libanius, great and widespread.
The protectors had become a great curse to the villagers themselves by
their tyranny and exactions. Their lawless sway had turned[1622] farmers
into brigands, and taught them to use iron not for tools of tillage but
for weapons of bloodshed. And the trouble was not confined to villages
where the land belonged to a number of small owners: it extended also to
those[1623] under one big proprietor. The argument that the villagers
have a right to seek help in resistance to extortion, is only sound if
the means employed are fair. To justify this limitation two significant
analogies[1624] are applied. Cities near the imperial frontier must not
call in the foreign enemy to aid them in settling their differences with
each other: they must seek help within the empire. A slave must not
invoke the aid of casual bystanders against ill-usage: he stands in no
relation to outsiders, and must look to his master for redress. The full
bearing of these considerations is seen when we remember that the farmers
are serf-tenants. They are owned[1625] by masters, as the municipal city
exists only in and for the empire, and the slave has no legal personality
apart from his lord.

It is a fact, says[1626] Libanius, that through such evasion of their
liabilities on the part of the rustics many houses have been ruined. He
is surely referring to the _curiales_ and other landlords resident in the
city, the numbers of which class it was the imperial policy to maintain
at full strength. In moral indignation[1627] he urges the iniquity of
beggaring poor souls who have nothing to live on but the income from
their lands. ‘Say I have an estate, inherited or bought, farmed by
sensible tenants who humbly faced the ups and downs of Fortune under
my considerate care. Must you then stir them up by agitation, arousing
unlooked-for conflicts, and reducing men of good family to indigence?’
This appeal would not sound overdrawn in the society of that age, though
it might fall somewhat coldly upon modern ears. But the most notable
point in this oration is the nature of the remedy[1628] for which the
writer pleads, and which none but the emperor can supply. It is simply to
enforce the existing law. Some years before, probably in 368, the emperor
Valens had strictly forbidden[1629] the ‘protections’ that were the cause
of this trouble. So now the appeal to Theodosius is ‘give the law sinews,
make it a law indeed[1630] and not a bare exhortation.’ For, if it is not
to be observed, it had better be repealed. That a leading writer of the
day could so state the case to the ruler of the Roman world is a fact to
be borne in mind by readers of the imperial laws.


LIII. SYMMACHUS

In passing on to =Q. Aurelius Symmachus=[1631] (about 345-405) we find
ourselves in very different surroundings. The scene is in Italy, and
the author a man of the highest station in what was still regarded as
the true centre of the Roman world. He was _praefectus urbi_ in 384-5,
consul in 391, and the leading figure in Roman society and literary
circles. From the bulky collection of his letters, and the forty reports
(_relationes_) addressed to the emperor by him as city prefect, we get
much interesting evidence as to the condition of rural Italy and the
anxieties of the corn-supply of Rome. With his championship of the old
religion, by which he is best known, we have here nothing to do; and
his literary affectations, characteristic of most writers of the later
Empire, do not discredit him as a witness. A remarkable feature of his
letters is their general triviality and absence of direct reference to
the momentous events that were happening in many parts of the empire.
His attention is almost wholly absorbed by matters with which he was
immediately connected, his public duties, his private affairs, the
interests of his relatives and friends, or the exchange of compliments.
His time is mostly passed either in Rome or at one or other of his
numerous country seats: for he was one of the great landlords of his
day, and the condition of Italian agriculture was of great importance to
him. As a representative of the landed interest and as a self-conscious
letter-writer he resembles the younger Pliny, but is weaker and set in a
less happy age.

A topic constantly recurring[1632] in his correspondence is the
apprehension of famine in Rome and the disturbances certain to arise
therefrom. The distribution of imperial powers among several seats of
government (of which Rome was not one) since the changes of Diocletian
had left to the ancient capital only a sort of traditional primacy. The
central bureaus were elsewhere, and Rome was only the effective capital
of the southern division of Italy. Yet the moral force of her great past
was still a living influence that expressed itself in various ways,
notably in the growth of the Papacy out of the Roman bishopric. For
centuries it had been the licensed lodging of a pauperized mob, fed by
doles to keep them quiet, enjoying luxurious baths at nominal cost, and
entertained with exciting or bloody shows in the circus or amphitheatre.
This rabble had either to be kept alive and amused or got rid of; but the
latter alternative would surely have reduced Rome to the condition of a
dead city. It was morally impossible for a Roman emperor to initiate so
ominous a policy. So the wasteful abomination dragged on, and every hitch
in the corn-supply alarmed not only the _praefectus annonae_ but the
_praefectus urbi_ with the prospect of bread riots. And the assignment
of the Egyptian corn to supply Constantinople made Rome more than ever
dependent on the fortunes of the African[1633] harvest. When this failed,
it was only by great departmental energy that temporary shortage was
made good by importations[1634] from Macedonia Sardinia or Spain or even
by some surplus from Egypt. Even lower Italy, where little corn was
grown, was at a pinch made to yield some. But bad seasons were not the
only cause of short supplies. The acts of enemies might starve out Rome,
as the rebellion of Gildo in Africa (397-8) nearly did. Moreover the
slackness and greed of officials[1635] sometimes ruined the efficiency of
the department, and ‘profiteering’ was practised by unscrupulous[1636]
capitalists. Nor even with good harvests abroad were the prefects
always at ease, since the corn-fleets might be delayed or scattered
by foul weather, and meanwhile the consumption did not cease. And it
sometimes happened that the cargoes were damaged and the public health
suffered[1637] from unwholesome food. Among these various cares the
_praefectura annonae_ was no bed of roses. No wonder the worthy Symmachus
tells us of private charity[1638] to relieve the necessities of the poor,
and even gives a hint of voluntary rationing at the tables of the rich.
But in appealing to the gods for succour he rather suggests that human
benevolence would be unequal to the strain.

That agriculture was not on a sound footing in most of Italy is evident
from several passages in the letters. In one of the earliest (before
376) he tells his father that, though he finds Campania charming, he
should like to join him at Praeneste. ‘But’ he adds ‘I am in trouble
about my property. I must go and inspect it wherever it lies, not in
hope of making it remunerative, but in order to realize the promise
of the land by further outlay. For things are nowadays come to such a
pass[1639] that an owner has to feed the farm that once fed him.’ Some
of the references to the management of estates are rather obscure. In
speaking of one near Tibur he mentions[1640] stewards (_vilicorum_)
and complains of their neglect. ‘The land is badly farmed, and great
part of the returns (_fructuum_) is in arrear (_debetur_): the _coloni_
have no means left[1641] to enable them to clear their accounts or to
carry on cultivation.’ The exact status of these stewards and tenants
and their relations to each other are far from clear, and the case may
have been a peculiar one. Again, writing to bespeak the good offices of
an influential man on behalf of an applicant, he says ‘I do this for
him rather as a duty[1642] than as an act of free grace, for he is a
farm-tenant of mine.’ The tenant’s name is Theodulus, which invites a
conjecture that this was a case of an oriental Greek slave placed as
tenant on a farm, either for his master’s account, or for his own at
a rent, and afterwards manumitted. A reference to _servi_, dependants
(_obnoxii_)[1643] who are owing him rents which his agents on the distant
estate in question do not take the trouble to collect, may point to the
same sort of arrangement. In another passage he mentions[1644] a man who
was for a long time _colonus_ under a certain landlord, but here too the
lack of detail forbids inference as to the exact nature of the relation.
That slave labour was still employed on some Italian farms appears from
a request[1645] for help in recovering some runaways. They may have been
house slaves, but if a neighbouring landlord gave them shelter no doubt
he made them pay for it in work. The control of slaves in the country
was never easy, and the quasi-military discipline described by Columella
was a confession of this. And it was only on a large scale that a staff
of overseers sufficient to work it could be provided. The time for it
was indeed gone by. Slaves employed in hunting[1646] are mentioned by
Symmachus as by Pliny. No doubt they took to this occupation with zest.
The degeneracy of hunting by deputy is contemptuously noted as a sign of
the times by the soldier critic[1647] Ammianus. But it was no new thing.

That the general state of the countryside was hardly favourable to the
quiet development of agriculture may be gathered from many notices. For
instance, when he would have been glad to be out of Rome for the good of
his health, he complains[1648] that the prevalence of brigandage in the
country near forces him to stay in the city. A friend urges him to come
back to Rome for fear of a violent raid on an estate apparently suburban:
he can only reply[1649] that a breach of possession during his absence
will not hold good in law. Whether the _militaris impressio_[1650] on
his farm at Ostia, to which he casually refers, was the raid of foreign
foes suddenly landing on that coast, or the lawless outrage of imperial
troops, is not certain: I rather suspect the latter. For, fifteen years
later (398), after the overthrow of Gildo, he writes[1651] that the
soldiers are all back from Africa, and the Appian way is clear: here the
meaning seems plain. And his endeavour[1652] to prevent the commandeering
of an old friend’s house at Ariminum for military quarters is significant
of the high-handed treatment of civilians by army men in those days, of
which we have other evidence. Nevertheless men were still willing to buy
estates. Symmachus himself was still adding to his vast possessions.
We see him in treaty[1653] for a place in Samnium, where there was
apparently some queer practice on the part of the seller: in another case
he is annoyed[1654] that his partner in a joint purchase has contrived
to secure the whole bargain as sole transferee, and rather sulkily
offers to waive his legal claims on being reimbursed what he has already
paid to the transferor. It seems strange that a man who, beside his
numerous properties in Italy, owned estates[1655] in Mauretania (where he
complains that the governors allow his interests to suffer) and in Sicily
(where the lessee is called _conductor_, probably a tenant in chief
subletting to _coloni_), should have had an appetite for more investments
of doubtful economic value. But other investments were evidently very
hard to find in an age when industry and commerce were fettered by the
compulsory gild-system. And a man of influence like Symmachus was better
able than one of the common herd to protect his own interests by the
favour of powerful officials.

We get glimpses of the condition of agriculture in Italy under the strain
of events. It must be borne in mind that Italy was no longer exempt from
the land-burdens of the imperial system. For many years, certainly from
383 to 398, Rome was hardly ever free from the fear of famine. It was
necessary to scrape together all the spare food that could be found in
the country in order to eke out the often interrupted importations from
abroad. The decline of food-production in rich Campania is indicated by
many scattered references. The district was probably too much given over
to vines, and a great part of it occupied by unproductive villas. In 396
Symmachus is relieved to know that the corn-supply of Rome is assured,
at least for twenty days. He goes on to mention[1656] that corn has been
transferred from Apulia to Campania. Whether this was for Campanian
consumption, or eventually to be forwarded to Rome, is not stated. I am
inclined to the former alternative by the consideration of the quarrel
between Tarracina and Puteoli referred to below. That corn should have
been brought from Apulia[1657] is a striking fact. A great part of that
province was taken up by pastures and oliveyards. It can only have had
corn to spare by reason of sparse population and good crops. If we had
the whole story of this affair, the explanation might prove to be simpler
than it can be now. In 397 he writes[1658] to a friend that the Apulians
are having a bad time. They are erroneously supposed to be in for a good
harvest, and so are being required to supply corn. This will be stripping
the province without materially helping the state. For winter is coming
on, and there is not time left to bring such a great crop of ripeness.
Symmachus had friends dependent on property in Apulia. Writing some four
years later[1659] he refers to this estate as rated for taxation on a
higher scale than its income would warrant: he asks the local governor to
see that it shall not be crushed by ‘public burdens.’

For to Symmachus, as to all or most men in this passive and cruelly
selfish age, the first thought was to protect their own interests and
those of their friends by engaging the favour of the powerful. Many of
the passages cited above illustrate this, and many more could be given.
The candour of some of his applications is remarkable. On behalf of one
dependant in trouble he says[1660] to the person addressed ‘but he will
get more help from the partiality of your judgment, for he really has
some right on his side.’ To another he writes[1661] that of course right
is always to be considered, but in dealing with _nobiles probabilesque
personas_ a judge should feel free to qualify strict rules, letting
the fairness of his decision appear[1662] in the distinction made. This
proposition introduces a request on behalf of his sister. Some farms of
hers are overburdened with the dues exacted by the state, and are now
empty for lack of tenants. Only the governor’s sanction can give them
the relief needed to restore them to solvency; and Symmachus trusts that
his friend will do the right thing by the lady. In another case[1663]
he asks favour for a dependant, significantly adding a request that
his friend will see to it that the case does not come before another
judge. Now, what chance of asserting their own rights had humble folk
in general, and poor working farmers in particular, when governors and
judges of all sorts were solicited like this by men whose goodwill was
worth securing,—men for the most part unscrupulous greedy and prone to
bear grudges, not such as the virtuous and kindly Symmachus? Perhaps
nothing shews the selfishness of the rich more than their attempts to
shirk the duty of furnishing recruits for the army. Yet we find in one
letter[1664] a request to a provincial governor to check the activities
of the recruiting agents. That the writer accuses these latter of
overstepping their legal powers can only be viewed with some suspicion,
considering his readiness to use private influence. Early in 398, when a
force was being raised to operate against Gildo, it was thought necessary
to enlist slaves from the city households. The protests[1665] of their
owners, in which Symmachus shared, were loud: the compensation allowance
was too low, and so forth. Yet, if any one was interested in suppressing
the rebel, it was surely these wealthy men.

That the obligation of providing for the sustenance of the idle populace
of Rome was not only a worry to officials but a heavy burden on farmers
in the Provinces whence the supplies were drawn, needs no detailed
proof. But they were used to the burden, and bore it quietly in average
years. A very bad season might produce dearth even in Africa, and call
for exceptional measures[1666] of relief on the part of emperors. So
Trajan had relieved Egypt. It was however an extreme step to ease the
pressure in Rome by expelling[1667] all temporary residents, as was
actually done during the famine of 383. These would be nearly all from
the Provinces, and Symmachus uneasily refers[1668] to the resentment that
the expulsion was certain to provoke. But in this age a rebellion of
provincials to gain redress of their own particular grievances was not a
conceivable policy. When discontent expressed itself in something more
than a local riot, it needed a head in the form of a pretender making a
bid for imperial power. But we are not to suppose that Rome, and later
Constantinople, stood quite alone in receipt of food-favours. The case
of two Italian municipalities, reported on[1669] by Symmachus in 384-5,
proves the contrary, and we have no ground for assuming that they were
the only instances. The important port-town of Puteoli was granted 150000
_modii_ of corn yearly towards the feeding of the city by Constantine.
Constans cut down the allowance to 75000. Constantius raised it again
to 100000. Under Julian a complication arose. The governor of Campania
found Tarracina in sore straits (evidently for food) because of the
failure[1670] of the supplies due from the towns long assigned for that
purpose. Now Tarracina had a special claim to support, since it provided
Rome with firewood for heating the baths and lime for the repair of the
walls. It seems that the governor felt bound to keep this town alive, but
had no new resources on which he could draw. So he took 5700 _modii_ from
the allowance of Puteoli and gave them to Tarracina. Final settlement was
referred to Julian, but not reached before his death in the Persian war
(363). The next stage was that a deputation from Capua[1671] addressed
the emperor Gratian, confining themselves to complaint of their own
losses. By this one-sided representation they procured an imperial order,
that the amount of corn allowance which Cerealis[1672] had claimed for
the people of Rome should be given back to all the cities deprived of it
by his act. But under this order the total recovered for sustenance of
the provincials only reached 38000 _modii_ of corn that had been added
to the stores of the eternal city. So Puteoli refused to hand over even
the 5700 to Tarracina. And the provincial governor did not go carefully
into the terms of the order, but ruled in favour of Puteoli. An appeal
followed, and it came out that the grant of 5700 to Tarracina was not an
ordinary bounty but an earmarked[1673] sum granted in consideration of
services to Rome. The governor did not feel able either to confirm it or
to take it away. Therefore the matter was referred to the emperors for
a final settlement. This strange story gives us a momentary glimpse of
things that make no figure in general histories. The abject dependence
of the municipalities on imperial favour stands out clearly: not less
so the precarious nature of such favours, a feature of the time amply
illustrated by the later imperial laws, numbers of which were simply
issued to withdraw privileges previously granted, under the stress of
needs that made it impossible to maintain them. Again, we see that
in addition to the normal jealousy of neighbours the competition for
imperial favour was an influence tending to hinder rather than promote
cohesion: tending in fact to weaken the fabric now menaced by the tribal
barbarians. Above all, this affair strongly suggests the partiality of
the central government to town populations. The farmers of the municipal
territories were certainly liable to the land-burdens, and were the
ultimate basis of imperial finance: but of them there is not a word.
Lastly, we may suppose that inter-municipal disputes such as this were
not of very frequent occurrence: but we have no reason to believe that
this Campanian case was unique.


LIV. AMMIANUS.

In =Ammianus Marcellinus= (about 330 to 400) we have an oriental Greek
from Antioch who passed a great part of his life in the military service
of the empire. He had travelled much, campaigned in Gaul and the East,
and was an observant man of wide interests, and in his history impartial
to the best of his power. Whether in deliberate criticisms, or in casual
references, he is an exceptionally qualified and honest witness as to the
state of things in the empire. On one important point his evidence is of
special value. All through the surviving portion of his work (353-378)
he leaves us in no doubt that the internal evils of the empire were
weakening it more than the pressure of barbarians from without. He does
not argue this in a section devoted to the topic, but he takes occasion
to notice the abuses that impaired the prosperity of the Provinces or
led directly to grave disasters. The corruption jealousy greed cruelty
and general misrule of officials high and low was no secret to him.
That the ultimate sufferers from their misdeeds were the poor, and more
particularly the poor farmers, may be gathered from many passages. That
the centre of this all-pervading disease lay in the imperial court,
a focus of intrigue and jobbery that the very best of emperors could
never effectively check, he was surely aware. At least it is only on
this assumption that we get the full flavour of his references to
court-intrigues and his criticisms of emperors, his balanced discussions
of their good and bad qualities and the effects of their policy and
practice. In truth the whole system was breaking down. It lasted longer
in the East than in the West, because the eastern peoples were more
thoroughly tamed. They had been used to despotic government long before
the coming of Rome. And the assaults of external enemies were more
formidable and persistent in the North and West than in the South and
East. Yet, so long as the empire held together, imperial despotism was
inevitable. Neither Ammianus nor any other writer of that age did or
could offer a possible alternative. Christianity might capture the
empire and spread among the barbarians, but it had no constructive
solution for the problems of imperial government.

A remarkably plain-spoken passage[1674] occurs in reference to the
events of 356, where he describes the administration of Julian in Gaul.
By his victories over the Germans he relieved the impoverished Gauls,
but this was by no means his only benefit. For instance, where he found
at his first coming a tax-unit[1675] of 25 gold pieces demanded as the
_tributum_, at his departure (360) he left things so much improved that
seven of these sufficed to meet all dues. Great was the joy in Gaul. As
a particular example of his thoughtful care, Ammianus cites his policy
in the matter of arrears of tribute. There were occasions, especially
in provinces liable to invasion, when it was certain that such arrears
could not be recovered in the ordinary course. It was not to the interest
of the central government to ruin or turn adrift farmers whose places
it would not be easy to fill. This consideration was no doubt used to
procure from emperors orders of remission, _indulgentiae_[1676] as they
were called. Julian to the last would not give relief by thus waiving
the imperial rights. ‘For he was aware[1677] that the effect of that
step would be to put money into the pockets of the rich; the universal
practice, as everyone knows, being for the poor to be made to pay up
the due amount in full directly the order of collection is issued, and
allowed no time of grace.’ It seems then that it was not the amount of
the imperial taxation, but the iniquities perpetrated in connexion with
its collection, that were the real burden crushing the vitality of the
Provinces. So thought Julian, rightly: and in the next year we find him
firmly upholding his principles in the face of exceptional difficulties.
The emperor Constantius had felt compelled to make Julian Caesar, and
to place him at the head of the Western section of the empire. But his
jealousy and fear of the Caesar’s winning glory in Gaul led him to
surround Julian with officers devoted to himself and secretly encouraged
to hamper their titular chief in every possible way. The court of
Constantius was a hotbed of intrigue and calumny. Private reports of
the doings of Julian were being regularly received. Any reforms that he
was able to make in Gaul had to be effected in the teeth of imperial
malignity.

A flagrant instance[1678] is seen in the efforts made to thwart his
reforming energy during the winter of 357-8. After defeating and humbling
aggressive German tribes, he set himself to relieve the distress of the
landowners, who had suffered great losses. There was at the time a great
need of money. The praetorian prefect of the Gauls, Florentius, proposed
to raise the sums required[1679] by an additional levy, and procured
from Constantius an order to that effect. Julian would rather die than
allow this. He knew what would happen in carrying it out, and that such
‘precautions’ (_provisiones_)[1680] or rather destructions (_eversiones_)
had often brought provinces into the extremities of want. The Prefect,
to whose department the matter in strictness belonged, protested loudly,
relying on the powers given him by Constantius. But Julian stood firm,
and tried to soothe him by calmly proving that there was no necessity for
the proposed measure. Careful calculations shewed that the normal impost
(_capitatio_) would produce enough to furnish the needful supplies, and
something to spare. He would have nothing to do with the order[1681]
for an extra levy. The Prefect duly reported this to Constantius, who
reprimanded the Caesar for his obstinacy. Julian replied that the
provincials had been exposed to ravages from various quarters, and that
if they were still able to render the usual dues[1682] the government
had reason to be thankful. To wring more out of men in distress by
punishments was impossible. And he did manage to prevent extraordinary
exactions in Gaul. In the winter of 358-9 he continued the same policy.
He saw to the equitable assessment[1683] of the tribute, and kept at bay
the horde of rascally officials who made fortunes[1684] out of injuring
the people. The corruption of the law-courts he checked by hearing the
important cases himself. No wonder that in an age of Christian emperors
the virtuous pagan earned a reputation as a restorer of Roman greatness
far beyond the boundaries of Gaul. Whether the fact that adherents of
polytheism were now chiefly to be found among rustics (_pagani_) had
anything to do with Julian’s clear appreciation of the sufferings of
countryfolk, is a question on which I cannot venture to offer an opinion.

That all or most of the corn levied by imperial taxation was in the
frontier Provinces required for the military commissariat is well known,
and the granaries for storing it were a leading feature of permanent
camps and garrison towns. The feeding of armies in the field, always
wasteful, no doubt consumed a great deal. In the case of Gaul (for to
live on the country was starvation to a force invading wild Germany)
the quantity to be brought up to the front seems to have been normally
more than Gaul could spare. It was usual to rely on the harvests[1685]
of Britain. Transport was the main difficulty. Saxon pirates infested
the narrow seas, and the navigation of the Rhine was blocked by Franks.
Julian’s energy cleared away these obstacles, and saw to the erection
or repair of granaries in the Rhineland towns to receive the British
corn. These measures enabled him to do without making extra demands on
the farmers of Gaul, a step sometimes unavoidable when there was war
on the frontiers. Of course such commandeering was very unpopular, and
wise generals avoided it whenever possible. Ammianus draws particular
attention[1686] to this matter when narrating the campaign of Theodosius
in Mauretania (373). He forbade the levy of supplies from the
provincials, announcing that he would make the stores of the enemy[1687]
provide the commissariat, and the landowners were delighted.

Among the interesting references that occur in the course of the work are
some that throw further light on the conditions of life in the parts of
the empire subject to invasion. It is not necessary to cite the frequent
mention of various kinds of fortified posts from great strongholds to
mere blockhouses. These remind us that the strength of the imperial
armies could never be so maintained as to guard the frontier at all times
on all points. Barbarian raiders slipped through[1688] the inevitable
gaps, and wide stretches of country were laid waste long before
sufficient forces could be gathered to expel them. We do not need the
descriptions of their cruel ravages to convince us that agriculture near
the Danube or Rhine borders was a perilous calling. If the farmer were
not carried away into bondage or slain, he was left robbed of his all,
and in imminent danger of starving: for the barbarians ate up everything,
and hunger was a principal motive in leading them to come and warning
them to return home. Naturally it was the custom in these border-lands
to provide fortified refuges here and there in which local farmers could
find temporary shelter with their belongings, and homesteads of any
importance were more or less equipped for defence. This was the state of
things even in Mauretania. We read of a farm[1689] (_fundus_) which the
brother of Firmus the rebel leader (373) ‘built up after the fashion of a
city’; also of one girt with a strong[1690] wall, a very secure refuge
for the Moors, to destroy which Theodosius had to employ battering-rams.
These are not the only instances. And forts (_castella_) and walled towns
are often referred to. Along the northern borders the necessity for such
precautions was much greater. Still it seems that few if any in the
latter part of the fourth century foresaw that frontier defences would
at no distant date give way before the barbarian flood. A high imperial
official, with whose corrupt connivance[1691] gross wrongs had been
perpetrated (370) in Africa, on being superseded in office withdrew to
his native Rhineland, and ‘devoted himself[1692] to rural affairs.’ The
retired ease for which he apparently hoped was soon ended, though not by
barbarian raiders. The malignity of a praetorian prefect tracked him to
his retreat and by persecution drove him to suicide.

This last episode may remind us that the weakening of the empire was
not wholly due to failure of an economic kind or to decay of military
skill. The farmers might raise crops enough, the armies might prove their
superiority in the field, but nevertheless the great organism was in
decline. A general mistrust, fatal to loyal cooperation for the common
good, was the moral canker by which the exertions of farmer and soldier
were hampered and rendered vain. Officials seeking to ruin each other,
emperors turning to murders and confiscations as a source of revenue, all
classes bound fast in rigid corporations or gilds under laws which it
was their study to evade; the failure of individual enterprise, lacking
the joy of individual freedom, and the stimulus of expected reward; in
short, everyone ready to sacrifice his neighbour to save his own skin:
how was a society characterized by such phenomena to maintain a moral
advantage over the rude barbarians? That it was now protected by alien
swords, that aliens were even commanding[1693] the Roman armies, was
not the main cause of its overthrow. As a rule these barbarians kept
their bargain, and shed their blood freely for the empire that enlisted
them in masses. But we must distinguish between two or three different
classes of these alien defenders. The mere mercenaries need not detain
us. More significant were the contingents taken over in large bodies by
agreement with the tribes. A good instance[1694] is that of the year
376, when a vast host of Goths sought leave to pass the Danube with the
hope of settling on vacant lands south of the river. We are told that
the Roman commanders on that front got over their first alarm and took
the line that really the emperor was in luck. Here was a huge supply of
recruits[1695] brought to him from the ends of the earth, an unlooked-for
reinforcement ready to be blended with his own troops, and to make up
an unconquerable army. Instead of spending the yearly payments of the
provinces[1696] on filling up the ranks, the treasury would gain a great
sum of gold. It would seem that they reported to the emperor in favour
of the request, for Valens granted the petition of a Gothic embassy.
Arrangements were made for transporting them over the river, and it was
understood that they had leave to settle in the parts of Thrace. But
now troubles began. Greedy Roman officials fleeced and maltreated the
hungry horde, who were at length driven into rebellion. With the sequel,
the great battle (378) near Adrianople, and the death of Valens, we are
not here concerned. But the account[1697] of their ravages in Thrace
gives us a picture of the countryside in a harassed province and of the
slave labour employed. The rebels, unable to take fortified places by
regular siege, overran the country in raiding bands. Captives guided them
to places stocked with food. But they were especially encouraged and
strengthened by the great number of people of their own race who came
pouring in to join them. Ammianus describes[1698] these deserters as
men who had long before been sold (into slavery of course) by traders,
and with them very many whom at the time of their passing the river,
when they were perishing of hunger, they had bartered for thin wine or
worthless scraps of bread.

This scene may serve to remind us that slavery and the sale of slaves to
Roman dealers were recognized features of German tribal life as described
by Tacitus. It also gives us a glimpse of the way in which opportunities
of imperial advantage could be wasted or turned into calamities by the
unpatriotic and selfish greed of Roman officials. In this case potential
recruits were turned into actual enemies; and the barbarian slaves, who
should have been tilling Thracian fields in the interest of Rome, were
left to guide and recruit the hostile army of their kinsmen. It must
not be supposed that all schemes for raising barbarian troops in large
bodies were thus by gross mismanagement brought to a disastrous end. The
value of sound flesh and blood in the ranks was well understood, and a
successful campaign against German tribes could be made profitable from
this point of view. Thus in 377, when Gratian had a whole tribe at his
mercy, he required of them a contingent[1699] of sturdy recruits to be
incorporated in Roman army-units, on delivery of whom he set free the
rest to return to their native homes. That such recruits became under
Roman discipline so far Romanized as to provide efficient armies is
clear from the victories that still delayed the fall of the empire. But
‘Roman’ was becoming more than ever a mere name-label: there had never
been a Roman nation. Of the third class of alien soldiery little need be
said. Military colonists of barbarian origin had for a long time past
been brought into the empire, some as frontier guards holding land on
condition of army service, others more in the interior, even[1700] in
Italy; and these latter undoubtedly furnished many recruits, on whatever
terms. The general result may be summed up in saying that, when the
barbarian invaders at last came to stay, they found their kindred already
there at home.


LV. CLAUDIAN.

In =Claudian=, who wrote about 400, we have another oriental Greek,
who wrote chiefly in Latin with far more mastery of that language than
Ammianus. Stilicho his patron, the great barbarian head of the Roman
army, was at the height of his power, and Claudian’s most congenial
occupation was to sing his praises and denounce his opponents. He was
also poet laureate of the feeble emperor Honorius. Writing mainly on
contemporary themes, he is, if allowance be made for his bias, a witness
worth citing; but the passages relevant to the present subject are
naturally few. In common with other writers of the later ages of Rome
he is constantly looking back to a great and glorious past, contrasting
painfully with that present which he nevertheless is striving to glorify.
Thus he not only refers with enthusiasm[1701] to the old heroes of Roman
history and legend, the common material of Roman literature, but even
dreams[1702] of a golden age to be, when the earth of her own accord
shall render all good things in abundance to a people living happily in
communistic brotherhood. This fancy however is no more than a piece of
unreal rhetoric, an echo of Vergil. It is inspired by the victories of
Stilicho, and the world-dominion under which this beatific vision is to
be realized is—the rule of Honorius.

In January 395 the great Theodosius died, and the empire was divided
between his two sons. In November, Rufinus, who dominated Arcadius at
Constantinople, was murdered. His place was soon taken by the eunuch
Eutropius. On these two personages Claudian poured out a flood of
invective, speaking for Stilicho and the West. The greed of Rufinus
is depicted[1703] as ruinous to the landed interests. ‘The fertility
of his land was the ruin of the landlord: a good crop[1704] made the
farmers tremble. He drives men from their homes, and thrusts them out
of their ancestral borders, either robbing the living or seizing the
estates of the dead.’ The jealousy of the West expresses itself in a
passage[1705] referring to the famine created in Rome by the rebellion
of Gildo in Africa. Honorius (that is Stilicho) is effusively praised
for its relief by importations from other Provinces, chiefly from Gaul.
That, owing to the claim of the New Rome to the corn of Egypt, the
Old Rome should be so dependent on Africa, is a situation indignantly
resented[1706] in eloquent lines. A symptom ominous of imperial failure
was the attempt to wrest eastern Illyricum from the rule of Arcadius
(407-8) an enterprise[1707] secretly concerted between Stilicho and
Alaric. Fugitives from Epirus sought refuge in Italy. Stilicho treated
them as prisoners of war from an enemy’s country, and handed them over
to Italian landlords as slaves or _coloni_. When Alaric and his Goths
moved towards Italy, some of these refugees, aided by a law issued for
their protection, found their way home again. Claudian unblushingly
declares[1708] that none but Stilicho will be able to heal the empire’s
wound: ‘at length the _colonus_ will return to his own borders and the
court will once more be enriched by the tributes of Illyricum.’

A Roman view of the intruding barbarians and their capacity of peaceful
settlement is in one place[1709] put into the mouth of Bellona the
war-goddess. She addresses a Gothic chief in bitter sarcasm. ‘Go and
be a thorough ploughman, cleaving the soil: teach your comrades to lay
aside the sword and toil at the hoe. Your Gruthungians[1710] will make
fine cultivators, and tend vineyards in accordance with the seasons.’ She
taunts him with degenerating from the good old habits of his race, war
and plunder, and scornfully describes him as one captured[1711] by the
glamour of fair dealing, who had rather live as a serf on what is granted
him than as a lord on what he takes by force. In short, he is a coward.
Now no doubt there were Goths and others, Huns in particular, of this
war-loving work-hating type approved by the war-goddess. But abundant
evidence shews that many, perhaps most, of the barbarians were quite
ready to settle down in peace and produce their own food. When Claudian
himself speaks[1712] of the ‘Teuton’s ploughshare’ as one of the agencies
producing corn that relieved famine in Rome, he is most likely referring
to the many Germans already settled in Gaul as well as to inhabitants of
the ‘Germanies,’ the two provinces along the Rhine.

A curious passage[1713] in the poem on the Gothic war and Stilicho’s
defeat of Alaric at Pollentia (402) is of interest in connexion with the
Roman army and the recruiting system. Of the confidence revived in Rome
by the appearance of Stilicho and his troops a vivid picture is drawn,
and he continues ‘henceforth[1714] no more pitiful conscription, no more
of reapers laying down the sickle and wielding the inglorious javelin
... nor the mean clamorous jangling of amateur leaders: no, this is the
presence of a genuine manhood, a genuine commander, a scene of war in
real life.’ If this means anything, it implies that hasty levies[1715]
of raw countrymen were notoriously unfit to face hordes of barbarian
tribesmen in the field. True, no doubt; professional training had been
the basis of efficiency in Roman armies ever since the days of Marius.
But the words surely suggest further that conscription within the empire
was in Claudian’s time not found a success, that is in producing a
supply of fit recruits to keep the legions up to strength. This also was
doubtless true, as much other evidence attests, and was the main reason
why the ‘Roman’ soldiery of the period were mostly barbarians. But here,
as usual, the witness of the court-poet is in the form of admission
rather than statement. His business was to be more Roman than Rome. It
remains only to mention two similes, one of which perhaps refers to free
labour. An old crone[1716] has ‘poor girls’ under her engaged in weaving.
They beg for a little holiday, but she keeps them at work ‘to earn their
joint livelihood.’ This may be a scene from life, but is more likely
an echo from earlier poetry. When he illustrates[1717] the effect of
Stilicho’s coming on the peoples rising against Rome by comparing them
to slaves, deceived by false report of their lord’s death, and caught
revelling by him when he unexpectedly returns, it is a scene that might
be enacted in any age. The little poem on the old man of Verona is famous
as a picture of humble contentment in rustic life. But the main point of
it as evidence is that the case is exceptional.


LVI. VEGETIUS.

=Vegetius=, a contemporary of Ammianus and Claudian, is credited with
two surviving works, one on the military system, the other on veterinary
practice. Both are largely compilations, and belong to the class of
technical writings which formed a great part of the literature of this
age. In discussing army matters the author looks back with regret to
the sounder conditions of the past. Speaking[1718] of the quality of
recruits, he says ‘It can surely never have been matter of doubt that
the common countryfolk are more fit (than townsfolk) to bear arms, reared
as they are in toil under the open sky, able to stand the heat of the sun
and caring not for the shade, with no experience of baths or knowledge
of luxuries, straightforward and frugal, with limbs hardened to endure
any kind of toil; for the wearing of armour, digging of trenches, and
carrying their kit, are continuations of rustic habit.’ It is true that
sometimes town-bred recruits have to be levied, but they need long and
careful training to fit them for active service. True, the Romans of old
went out to war from the city. But luxury was unknown in those days:
the farmer of today was the warrior of tomorrow, by change of weapons.
Cincinnatus went straight from the plough to be dictator. A little after,
speaking[1719] of the standard of height, he tells us that it has always
been usual to have a standard tested by actual measurement, below which
no recruit was passed for service in certain crack units. But there
were then[1720] larger numbers to draw from, and more men followed the
combatant service, for the civil service[1721] had not as yet carried off
the pick of those in military age. Therefore, if circumstances require
it, strength rather than height should be the first consideration. I am
loth to infer much[1722] from this passage, the period referred to in
‘then’ being undefined. What it does shew is that in the writer’s own
time a considerable number of men of military age (Romans being meant)
were attracted by the civil career of the new imperial service, which
in all its grades was technically styled[1723] a _militia_. Nor does
it appear certain that in preferring the rustic recruit to the urban
Vegetius implies the existence of a plentiful supply of the former among
the subjects of the empire. His words rather suggest to me the opposite
conclusion, which is in agreement with the evidence from other sources.

Turning to the veterinary work (_ars mulomedicinae_) we come upon a
chapter devoted[1724] to the management of horses. It is well to keep a
free space near the stable for the beasts to get exercise by rolling,
for they need exercise. ‘And for this end it is very helpful to have
them mounted[1725] often and ridden gently. Unskilful riders spoil both
their paces and their temper. Most mischievous is the recklessness[1726]
of slaves. When the master is not there, they urge his horses to gallop,
using spur as well as whip, in matches of speed with their mates or in
fiercely-contested races against outsiders: it never occurs to them to
halt or check their mounts. For they give no thought[1727] to what is
their master’s loss, being well content that it falls on him. A careful
owner will most strictly forbid such doings, and will only allow his
cattle to be handled by suitable grooms who are gentle and understand
their management.’ We must bear in mind that the horse was not used in
agriculture or as an ordinary beast of burden. Horse-breeding was kept
up to supply chargers for war, racers for the circus, mounts for men
of the wealthier classes in hunting or occasionally for exercise, for
solemn processions and such like. When Vegetius treats of a stable or
stud of horses, he has in mind the establishment of a gentleman of means,
and it is worth noting that such an establishment could be contemplated
by a writer of about 400 AD. This harmonizes with the picture of
Italian conditions that we get from the letters of Symmachus and other
sources. A few rich were very rich, the many poor usually very poor.
The carelessness, wastefulness, thievishness, of slaves is a very old
story, and in the middle of the fourth century had been bitterly referred
to[1728] by the emperor Julian. That Vegetius does not advise the owner
of these slave grooms to make a _vilicus_ responsible for seeing that his
orders are obeyed, is probably due to the rigidly technical character of
the treatise: he is not writing on the management of estates.




CHRISTIAN WRITERS


LVII. LACTANTIUS.

When we turn to the Christian writers, whom it is convenient to take
by themselves, we pass into a different atmosphere. Of rhetoric there
is plenty, for most of them had been subjected to the same literary
influences as their Pagan contemporaries. But there is a marked
difference of spirit, more especially in one respect very important
from the point of view of the present inquiry. Christianity might
counsel submission to the powers that be: it might recognize slavery
as an institution: it might enjoin on the slave to render something
beyond eye-service to his legal master. But it could never shake off
the fundamental doctrine of the equal position of all men before their
Almighty Ruler, and the prospect of coming life in another world, in
which the standards and privileges dominating the present one would go
for nothing. Therefore a Christian writer differed from the Pagan in his
attitude towards the poor and oppressed. He could sympathize with them,
not as a kindly though condescending patron, but as one conscious of
no abiding superiority in himself. The warmth with which the Christian
witnesses speak is genuine enough. The picture may be somewhat overdrawn
or too highly coloured, and we must allow for some exaggeration, but in
general it is surely true to fact.

First comes =Lactantius=, who has already[1729] been once quoted. Writing
under Constantine, he speaks of the Diocletian or Galerian persecution
as a contemporary. The passage[1730] to be cited here describes the
appalling cruelty of the fiscal exactions ordered by Galerius to meet
the pressing need of the government for more money. It was after the
abdication of Diocletian and Maximian in 305. The troubles that ensued
had no doubt helped to render financial necessities extreme. The remark,
that he now practised against all men the lessons of cruelty learnt
in tormenting the Christians, must refer to Galerius. The account of
the census[1731], presumably that of 307, is as follows. ‘What brought
disaster on the people and mourning on all alike, was the sudden letting
loose of the census on the provinces and cities. Census-officers, sparing
nothing, spread all over the land, and the scenes were such as when an
enemy invades a country and enslaves the inhabitants. There was measuring
of fields clod by clod, counting of vines and fruit trees, cataloguing
of every sort of animals, recording of the human[1732] heads. In the
municipalities (_civitatibus_) the common folk of town and country put
on the same[1733] footing, everywhere the market-place crammed with the
households assembled, every householder with his children and slaves.
The sounds of scourging and torturing filled the air. Sons were being
strung up to betray parents; all the most trusty slaves tortured to give
evidence against their masters, and wives against husbands. If all these
means had failed, men were tortured for evidence against themselves,
and when they broke down under the stress of pain they were credited
with admissions[1734] never made by them. No plea of age or infirmity
availed them: informations were laid against the invalids and cripples:
the ages of individuals were recorded by guess, years added to those
of the young and subtracted from those of the old. All the world was
filled with mourning and grief.’ In short, Romans and Roman subjects
were dealt with as men of old dealt with conquered foes. ‘The next
step was the paying[1735] of moneys for heads, a ransom for a life.
But the whole business was not entrusted to the same body of officials
(_censitoribus_); one batch was followed by others, who were expected to
make further discoveries: a continual doubling of demands went on, not
that they discovered more, but that they made additions arbitrarily, for
fear they might seem to have been sent to no purpose. All the while the
numbers of live stock were falling, and mankind dying; yet none the less
tribute was being paid on behalf of the dead, for one had to pay for
leave to live or even to die. The only survivors were the beggars from
whom nothing could be wrung, immune for the time from wrongs of any sort
by their pitiful destitution.’ He goes on to declare that, in order to
prevent evasion of the census on pretence of indigence, a number of these
poor wretches were taken out to sea and drowned.

In this picture[1736] we may reasonably detect high colouring and perhaps
downright exaggeration. Probably the grouping together of horrors
reported piecemeal from various quarters has given to the description
as a whole a somewhat deceptive universality. That the imperial system,
though gradually losing ground, held its own against unorganized
barbarism for several more centuries, seems proof positive that no
utter destruction of the economic fabric took place in the census to
which Lactantius refers. But that the pressure exerted by the central
power, and the responsive severity of officials, were extreme, and
that the opportunities for extortion were seized and cruelly used, may
fairly be taken for fact on his authority. This was not the beginning
of sufferings to the unhappy tillers of the soil, nor was it the end.
One census might be more ruinous to their wellbeing than another: it
was always exhausting, and kept the farmers in terror. But they had
not as yet reached the stage of thinking it better to bear the yoke of
barbarian chieftains than to remain under the corrupt and senseless
maladministration of imperial Rome.


LVIII. SULPICIUS SEVERUS.

The life and doings of the famous saint of Gaul, Martin of Tours, a
Pannonian by birth, were chronicled by =Sulpicius Severus=, writing soon
after 400, in an enthusiastic biography still in existence. In another
work occurs a passage[1737] narrating one of his hero’s many miracles;
and the story is too artlessly illustrative of the behaviour of the
military and the state of things on the public roads, not to be mentioned
here. Martin was travelling on his ecclesiastical duties, riding on an
ass with friends in company. The rest being for a moment detained, Martin
went on alone for a space. Just then a government car (_fiscalis raeda_)
occupied by a party of soldiers was coming along the road. The mules
drawing it shied at the unfamiliar figure of the saint in his rough and
dark dress. They got entangled in their harness, and the difficulty of
disentangling them infuriated the soldiers, who were in a hurry. Down
they jumped and fell upon Martin with whips and staves. He said not a
word, but took their blows with marvellous patience, and his apparent
indifference only enraged them the more. His companions picked him up all
battered and bloody, and were hastening to quit the scene of the assault,
when the soldiers, on trying to make a fresh start, were the victims
of a miracle. No amount of beating would induce the mules to stir.
Supernatural influence was suspected and made certain by discovery of the
saint’s identity. Abject repentance was followed by gracious forgiveness,
and mules and soldiers resumed their journey. Now the point of interest
to us is the matter-of-fact way in which this encounter is narrated. That
a party of the military should bully peaceful civilians on the high road
is too commonplace an event to evoke any special comment or censure.
But it is clearly an edifying fact that violence offered to a holy man
did not escape divine punishment. There is no suggestion that similar
brutality to an ordinary rustic would have met with any punishment human
or divine. Laws framed for the protection of provincials[1738] against
illegal exactions and to prevent encroachments of the military[1739]
remained on the statute-book, but in remote country parts they were dead
letters. It is interesting to recall that Martin had in his youth served
for some years as a soldier. As the son of a veteran, his enrolment[1740]
came in the ordinary course. But, though he is said to have been
efficient, he did not like the profession and got his discharge with
relief. His life covered about the last three quarters of the fourth
century.


LIX. SALVIAN.

The calamities that befel the Roman world in the fourth century led
to much recrimination between Pagan and Christian, each blaming the
other for misfortunes generally regarded as the signal expression of
divine wrath. Symmachus had been answered by Ambrose, and Christian
interpretation of the course of human history produced its classic in
Augustine’s great work _de civitate Dei_ early in the fifth century.
About the same time Orosius wrote his earnest but grotesque _historiae
adversus paganos_, an arbitrary and superficial distortion of history,
interesting as a specimen of partisan composition. But it is not till
the middle of the century that we come upon a Christian author who gives
us a graphic picture of the sufferings of the people in a Province of
the empire, and a working theory of their causes, strictly from a pious
Christian’s point of view. This is =Salvian=, an elder of the Church at
Massalia. His evidence is cited by all historians, and must be repeated
here. The main thesis is that all the woes and calamities of the age
are judgments of God provoked by the gross immorality[1741] of the
Roman world. So far from imputing all vices and crimes to the Heathen
and the Pagan, he regards them as shared by all men: but he draws a
sharp line between those who sin in ignorance, knowing no better, and
those who profess the principles of a pure Christianity and yet sin
against the light that is in them. For the barbarians are either Heathen
or Heretics (he is thinking of the Arians), while in the empire the
Orthodox church prevails. And yet the barbarians prosper, while the
empire decays. Why? simply because even in their religious darkness the
barbarians are morally superior to the Romans. For our present purpose
it is the economic and social phenomena as depicted by Salvian that are
of interest, and I proceed to give an abstract of the passage[1742] in
which he expounds his indictment of Roman administration and the corrupt
influences by which it is perverted from the promotion of prosperity and
happiness to a cause of misery and ruin.

The all-pervading canker is the oppression of the poor by the rich. The
heavy burdens of taxation are thrown upon the poor. When any relief is
granted, it is intercepted by the rich. Franks Huns Vandals and Goths
will have none of these iniquities, and Romans living among those
barbarians also escape them. Hence the stream of migration sets from us
to them, not from them to us. Indeed our poor folk would migrate in a
body, but for the difficulty of transferring their few goods their poor
hovels and their families. This drives them to take another course. They
put themselves under the guardianship and protection of more powerful
persons, surrendering[1743] to the rich like prisoners of war, and
so to speak passing under their full authority and control. But this
protection is made a pretext for spoliation. For the first condition
of protection is the assignation[1744] of practically their whole
substance to their protectors: the children’s inheritance is sacrificed
to pay for the protection of their parents. The bargain is cruel and
one-sided, a monstrous and intolerable wrong. For most of these poor
wretches, stripped of their little belongings and expelled from their
little farms, though they have lost their property, have still to bear
the tribute on the properties lost: the possession is withdrawn, but
the assessment[1745] remains: the ownership is gone, but the burden
of taxation is crushing them still. The effects of this evil are
incalculable. The intruders (_pervasores_) are settled down (_incubant_)
on their properties, while they, poor souls, are paying the tributes on
the intruders’ behalf. And this condition passes on to their children. So
they who have been despoiled by the intrusion[1746] of individuals are
being done to death by the pressure of the state (_publica adflictione_),
and their livelihood is taken from them by squeezing as their property
was by robbery. Some, wiser or taught by necessity, losing their homes
and little farms through intrusions or driven by the tax-gatherers to
abandon them through inability to keep them, find their way to the
estates of the powerful, and become[1747] serf-tenants (_coloni_) of
the rich. Like fugitives from the enemy or the law, not able to retain
their social birthright, they bow themselves[1748] to the mean lot of
mere sojourners: cast out of property and position, they have nothing
left to call their own, and are no longer their own masters. Nay, it is
even worse. For though they are admitted (to the rich men’s estates) as
strangers (_advenae_), residence operates to make them[1749] natives of
the place. They are transformed as by a Circe’s cup. The lord of the
place, who admitted them as outside[1750] aliens, begins to treat them
as his own (_proprios_): and so men of unquestioned free birth are being
turned into slaves. When we are putting our brethren into bondage, is it
strange[1751] that the barbarians are making bondsmen of us?

This is something beyond[1752] mere partisan polemic. It finds the source
of misery and weakness in moral decay. Highly coloured, the picture is
surely none the less true. The degradation of the rustic population
presents itself in two stages. First, the farmer, still owning his
little farm (_agellus_, _rescula_), finds that, what with legal burdens
and illegal extortions, his position is intolerable. So he seeks the
protection[1753] of a powerful neighbour, who exploits his necessities.
Apparently he acquires control of the poor man’s land, but contrives
to do it in such a form as to leave him still liable to payment of the
imperial dues. That this iniquity was forbidden[1754] by law mattered
not: corrupt officials shut their eyes to the doings of the rich. From
the _curiales_ of the several communities no help was to be looked for.
Salvian declares[1755] that they were tyrants to a man. And we must not
forget that they themselves were forced into office and held responsible
for paying in full the dues they were required to collect. The great
machine ground all, and its cruel effects were passed on from stronger
to weaker, till the peasant was reached and crushed by burdens that he
could not transmit to others. The second stage is the inevitable sequel.
The poor man’s lot is more intolerable than before. His lesson is learnt,
and he takes the final step into the status of a rich man’s _colonus_.
Henceforth his lord is liable[1756] for his dues, but he is himself the
lord’s serf, bound to the soil on which his lord places him, nominally
free, but unable to stir from the spot[1757] to which his labour gives a
value. If he runs away, the hue and cry follows him, and he is brought
ignominiously back to the servile punishment that awaits him—unless he
can make his way to some barbarian tribe. Whether he would find himself
so much better off in those surroundings as Salvian seems to imply, must
be left doubtful. Any family that he might leave behind would remain in
serfage under conditions hardly improved by his desertion.


LX. APOLLINARIS SIDONIUS.

The last of our array of witnesses is =Apollinaris Sidonius=[1758] (about
430-480), a writer whose life is singularly illustrative of the confused
period in which the Roman empire was tottering and the series of luckless
emperors was ended in the West. Britain had been finally lost in the time
of Honorius. The Armorican provinces had rebelled, and even now the hold
of Rome on them was slight and precarious. The rest of Gaul and much
of Spain and Africa had been subject to barbarian inroads, and numbers
of the invaders were settled in the country: for instance, the Western
Goths were fully established in Aquitania. But the Roman civilization
was by no means wiped out. Roman landlords still owned large estates:
Romans of culture still peddled with a degenerate rhetoric and exchanged
their compositions for mutual admiration. Panegyrics on shadowy emperors
were still produced in verse and prose, and the modern reader may often
be amazed to note the way in which the troubles of the time could be
complacently ignored. Above all, there was the Church, closely connected
with Rome, claiming to be Catholic and Orthodox, a stable organization,
able to make itself respected by the barbarians. That the latter were
Arian heretics was indeed a cause of friction, though the Arians were
destined to go under. The conversion of the Franks under the Catholic
form did not give Roman Christianity the upper hand till 496. But the
power of bishops, ever growing[1759] since the days of Constantine, was
throughout a powerful influence holding the various communities together,
maintaining law and order, and doing much for the protection of their own
people. A native of Lugudunum, the chief city of Gaul, Sidonius came of a
noble and wealthy family, and his social position evidently helped him in
his remarkable career. In 468 he was city prefect at Rome, barely eight
years before Odovacar removed the last of the titular Western emperors.
We find him anxiously concerned[1760] with the old food-question, like
his predecessor Symmachus, and not less endeavouring to cooperate
harmoniously with the _praefectus annonae_. For a hungry rabble, no doubt
fewer in number, still hung about the Eternal city, though its services
in the way of applause were no longer in appreciable demand.

From about 471 Sidonius was bishop[1761] of Arverni (Clermont in
Auvergne), and performed his difficult duties with efficiency and
dignity, a sincerely pious man with a good deal of the _grand seigneur_
about him. Moving about on duty or seeking restful change, he was
often visiting country houses, his own or those of friends, receiving
or returning hospitality. His references to these visits lead to
descriptions[1762] of many pleasant places, and pictures of life in the
society of cultivated gentlemen to which he belonged. There is hardly any
mention of the suffering farmers of whom Salvian speaks so eloquently.
Yet I hesitate to charge Salvian with gross exaggeration and imaginative
untruth. Not only do the two men look from different points of view.
Sidonius is writing some twenty years later than Salvian, and much had
happened in the meantime. The defeat of Attila in 451 by the armies of
the Romans and Western Goths had not only saved Gaul from the Huns, but
had greatly improved the relations between Goth and Roman. And it is to
be noted that, in a passage[1763] mentioning the victory of the allies
and the reception of Thorismund the Gothic king as a guest at Lugudunum,
Sidonius praises his correspondent[1764] for his share in lightening the
burdens of the landowners. Now Salvian knows nothing of the battle of
451, and indeed does not regard the Huns as being necessarily enemies of
Rome. It seems certain that for the rustics things were changed for the
better. Not that the farmer was his own master, but that the great Roman
taxing-machine was no longer in effective action. A great part of Gaul
had passed under Teutonic lords. If the subjects were exposed to their
caprice, it was of a more personal character, varying with individuals
and likely to be modified by their personal qualities. This was a very
different thing from the pressure of the Roman official hierarchy, the
lower grades of which were themselves squeezed to satisfy the demands
of the higher, and not in a position to spare their victims, however
merciful their own inclinations might be.

But though the establishment of barbarian kingdoms, once the raiding
invasions were over, had its good side from the working farmer’s point
of view, much of the old imperial system still lingered on. The power
of the Catholic Church stood in the way of complete revolution, and the
Church was already[1765] a landowner. Roman traditions died hard, and
among them it is interesting to note the exertion of private interest
on behalf of individuals and causes in which an honourable patron felt
some concern. Thus we find Sidonius writing[1766] on behalf of a friend
who wants to buy back an ancestral estate with which recent troubles
have compelled him to part. Great stress is laid on the point that the
man is not grasping at pecuniary profit but actuated by sentimental
considerations: in short, the transaction proposed is not a commercial
one. The person addressed is entreated to use his influence[1767] in
the applicant’s favour; and we can only infer that he is asked to put
pressure on the present owner to part with the property, probably to take
for it less than the market price. Another letter[1768] is to a bishop,
into whose district (_territorium_) the bearer, a deacon, fled for refuge
to escape a Gothic raid. There he scratched a bit of church-land and
sowed a little corn. He wants to get in his crop without deductions.
The bishop is asked to treat him with the consideration usually shewn
to the faithful[1769]; that is, not to require of him the season’s
rent[1770]. If this favour is granted him, the squatter reckons that he
will do as well as if he were farming in his own district, and will be
duly grateful. Very likely a fair request, but Sidonius does not leave
it to the mere sense of fairness in a brother bishop. To another bishop
he writes a long letter[1771] of thanks for his thoughtful munificence.
After the devastation of a Gothic raid, further damage had been suffered
by fires among the crops. The ensuing distress affected many parts of
Gaul, and to relieve it this worthy sent far and wide bountiful gifts
of corn. The happy results of his action have earned the gratitude of
numerous cities, and Sidonius is the mouthpiece of his own Arverni. The
affair illustrates the beneficence of good ecclesiastics in troubled
times. For Gaul was not enjoying tranquil repose. The barbarians were
restless, and the relations[1772] between their kings and the failing
empire were not always friendly. Religious differences too played a part
in preventing the coalescence of Gallo-Roman and Teuton. The good bishop
just referred to is praised by Sidonius as a successful converter of
heretics.

The fine country houses with their vineyards and oliveyards and general
atmosphere of comfort and plenty shew plainly that the invasions and
raids had not desolated all the countryside. The first need of the
invaders was food. Wanton destruction was not in their own interest,
and the requisitioning of food-stuffs was probably their chief offence,
naturally resented by those who had sown and reaped for their own
consumption. If we admit this supposition, it follows that their
operations, like those of other successful invaders, would be directed
mainly to the lowland districts, where most of the food-stuffs were
produced. Now the country houses of Sidonius and his friends were, at
least most of them, situated in hilly country, often at a considerable
distance from the main[1773] roads, among pleasant surroundings which
these kindly and cultivated gentlemen were well qualified to enjoy. It
is evident that some, perhaps many, of these snug retreats were not
seriously[1774] molested, at all events in southern and south-eastern
Gaul. Roughly speaking, the old and most thoroughly Romanized provinces,
the chief cities of which were Lugudunum and Narbo, were still seats
(indeed the chief seats) of Roman civilization. It was there that the
culture of the age survived in literary effort sedulously feeding on the
products and traditions of the past. Sidonius thinks it a pity[1775] that
men of education and refinement should be disposed to bury their talents
and capacity for public service in rural retreats, whether suburban or
remote. The truth probably was that town life had ceased to be attractive
to men unconcerned in trade and not warmly interested in religious
partisanship. The lord of a country manor, surrounded by his dependants,
could fill his store-rooms and granaries[1776] with the produce of their
labour. He still had slaves[1777] to wait on him, sometimes even to work
on the land. With reasonable kindliness and care on his part, he could be
assured of comfort and respect, the head of a happy rustic community. The
mansions of these gentry, sometimes architecturally[1778] fine buildings,
were planted in spots chosen for local advantages, and the library was
almost as normal a part of the establishment as the larder. Some of the
owners of these places gave quite as much of their time and attention to
literary trifling as to the management of their estates. The writing of
letters, self-conscious and meant for publication, after the example of
Pliny the younger, was a practice of Sidonius. The best specimen of this
kind is perhaps the long epistle[1779] in which he describes minutely
a place among the foot-hills of the Alps. Every attraction of nature
seconded by art is particularized, down to the drowsy tinkling of the
bells on the mountain flocks accompanied by the shepherd’s pipe. No doubt
the effective agriculture[1780] of Gaul had little in common with these
Arcadian scenes. The toiling _coloni_, serfs of a barbarian chief or a
Roman noble, were all the while producing the food needed to support
the population; and it is a convincing proof of the superficiality of
Sidonius as an observer of his age that he practically ignores them.

To attempt a full description of society in Roman Gaul of the fifth
century is quite beyond my scope. It has already been admirably done by
Sir Samuel Dill. But there are a few points remaining to be discussed as
relevant to my subject. That the decline of the middle class, and the
passing of large areas of land into few hands, was a process forwarded by
inability to pay debts incurred, is extremely probable. It had been going
on for many centuries. But I do not see that the evidence of Sidonius
suggests that this evil was in his time especially prevalent. The case
cited[1781] is peculiar. The borrower is expressly stated not to have
mortgaged any of his land. The loan was only secured by a written bond
which fixed the interest[1782] at 12% per annum. This had been ten years
in arrear, and the total debt was now doubled. The debtor fell ill, and
pressure was put on him by officials employed to collect debts. I infer
that the lack of real security prompted this dunning of a sick man, for
fear the personal security might lapse by his death. Sidonius, a friend
of the creditor, undertook to plead with him for at least some stay of
action. This man had lately been ordained, and Sidonius (not yet himself
in orders, I think,) was evidently surprised to note the simple religious
life led by him in his country villa. And he needed little entreaty, but
acted up to what he considered his duty to a brother Christian. He not
only granted further time for payment, but remitted the whole of the
accrued interest, claiming only the principal sum lent. Such conduct may
have been, and probably was, exceptional; but I cannot argue from it that
heartless usurers were eating up the small landowners of Gaul.

So too the case of the young man[1783] of good position who cast off a
slave mistress and wedded a young lady of good family, reputation, and
property, may have been exceptional. Sidonius takes it all very coolly,
and mildly improves the occasion. A far more interesting affair is one
in a lower station of life, of which I must say a few words. In a brief
letter[1784] to his friend Pudens he says ‘The son of your nurse has
raped my nurse’s daughter: it is a shocking business, and would have made
bad blood between you and me, only that I saw at once you did not know
what to do in the matter. You begin by clearing yourself of connivance,
and then condescend to ask me to condone a fault committed in hot
passion. This I grant, but only on these terms, that you release[1785]
the ravisher from the status of a Sojourner, to which he belongs by
birth; thus becoming his patron instead of his lord. The woman is free
already. And to give her the position of a wedded wife, and not the
plaything of caprice, there is but one way. Our scamp for whom you
intercede must become your Client[1786] and cease to be a Tributary,
thus acquiring the quality of an ordinary Commoner rather than that of a
Serf.’ Sidonius is as usual ready to make the best[1787] of a bad job.
From his proposal I draw the following conclusions. First, as to the
nurses. The _nutrix_, like the Greek τροφός, held a position of trust
and respect in the household, consecrated by immemorial tradition. No
slave had a higher claim to manumission, if she desired it. It would
seem that Sidonius’ ‘mammy’ was ending her days as a freedwoman, and
hence her daughter was free. It looks as if the nurse of Pudens were
still a slave, and her son an _inquilinus_ on the estate of Pudens.
He may very well have been tenant of a small holding, practically a
serf-tenant. Pudens is still his _dominus_. His quality of _inquilinus_
attaches to him in virtue of his _origo_; that is, he is registered in
the census-books[1788] as a human unit belonging to a particular estate
and taken into account in estimating taxation-units. Therefore he is
_tributarius_[1789]. Sidonius proposes to divest him of the character of
serf and make him an ordinary Roman citizen. The difference this would
make is probably a purely legal one. Being at present a Serf, probably in
strict law a slave also, his connexion with the girl is a _contubernium_.
His manumission[1790] (for such it really is) will enable him to convert
it into a _matrimonium_, carrying the usual legal responsibilities.
The practical change in his economic position will probably be nil. He
will still remain a dependent _colonus_, but he may perhaps enjoy the
privilege of paying his own share[1791] of taxes. That Sidonius speaks
of his present condition first as Inquilinate and then as Colonate, is
one of many proofs that the two terms now connoted virtually[1792] the
same thing. Such had already been stated as a fact in a law of Honorius,
which was retained by Tribonian in the code of Justinian. Whether the
_inquilini_ were barbarian bondsmen (_hörige_), tenants bound to the soil
like _coloni_ but the personal property of their landlords, as Seeck
holds; or usually descendants of _coloni_, as Weber thought; is more than
I can venture to decide. I do not think that either hypothesis[1793]
exhausts all the possibilities, and the point is not material to the
present inquiry. In any case it can hardly be doubted that both classes
consisted of men who worked with their own hands, only aided in some
cases by slave labour which was far from easy to procure.


LXI. CONCLUDING CHAPTER.

After so long a discussion of the surviving evidence, it is time to
sum up the results and see to what conclusions the inquiry leads us in
respect of the farm life and labour of the Greco-Roman world. And first
as to the figures of the picture, the characters with whose position
and fortunes we are concerned. We find three classes, owner farmer
labourer, clearly marked though not so as to be mutually exclusive. We
can only begin with ownership in some form, however rudimentary; for
the claim to resist encroachment on a more or less ill-defined area
is a phenomenon of even the rude life of hunter-tribes. How private
property grew out of common ownership is a question beyond the range
of the present inquiry. It is enough that the owner, whether a clan
or a family or an individual, has a recognized right to use the thing
owned (here land) and to debar others from doing so. But it is clear
that he may also be the actual manager of its use: he may even supply
in person all the labour needed for turning it to account: in short,
he may be his own farmer and his own labourer. And legend asserts or
implies that such was the primitive condition of man when he passed from
nomadic to settled existence. Differentiation of function is therefore
a product of time and circumstance, a development varying in date and
degree among various races and in various portions of the world. Once
the stage of civilization is reached at which the regular cultivation of
the same piece of land year by year is the normal means of sustaining
human life, we meet the simplest economic figure, the peasant who
supplies his own needs by his own methods, tilling the soil which in
some sense he claims as his own. Whether it is his own permanently as
an individual, or temporarily as a member of a village community, is a
difference immaterial from the present point of view. Nor does it matter
that his method of dealing with the land may be regulated by principles
conventional in the society to which he belongs.

Delegation of management is a momentous step, destined to bring important
unforeseen consequences. Many reasons may have rendered it necessary or
at least convenient. It appears in two forms, the actual and relative
dates of which are hardly to be determined with certainty. Either the
owner keeps the profit of the undertaking and bears the loss, or some
division of profit and loss between the owner and the manager is the
condition of the arrangement between the two parties. Ownership is
not abdicated: nor is it easy to see how, without a clear recognition
of ownership, any system of delegation could arise. But on the first
plan the owner owns not only the land but the service of his delegate.
Whether the man be a client bound to his patron by social custom, or
an agent earning a wage, or a slave the property of his master, he is
merely a servant in charge. He can be superseded at any moment at the
landowner’s will. The free tenant on the other hand is a creature of
contract, and his existence presupposes a community in which the sanctity
of deliberate bargains is considerably developed. Whether the tenant’s
obligation consists in the payment of a fixed rent in money or kind, or
in a share of produce varying with the season’s crop, does not matter.
He is bound by special law, however rudimentary; and it is the interest
of the community to see that such law is kept in force: for no one would
enter into such bargains if their fulfilment were not reasonably assured.
Whether a certain reluctance to enter into such a relation may perhaps
account for the rare and doubtful appearance of tenancy in early Roman
tradition, or whether it is to be set down simply to defects of record,
I do not venture to decide. The landlord’s obligation is to allow his
tenant the enjoyment and free use of a definite piece of land on certain
terms for a stipulated period. Further stipulations, giving him the
right to insist on proper cultivation and the return of the land in good
condition at the end of the tenancy, were doubtless soon added at the
dictation of experience. That tenant farmers with their families usually
supplied labour as well as management, is surely not to be doubted. That,
in the times when we begin to hear of this class as non-exceptional, they
also employed slave labour, is attested: that we do not hear of them as
engaging free wage-earners, may or may not be an accidental omission.

Labour, simply as labour, without regard to the possible profit or loss
attending its results, was no more an object of desire, engaged in for
its own sake, in ancient times than it is now. Domestication of animals,
a step implying much attentive care and trouble, was a great advance in
the direction of securing a margin of profit on which mankind could rely
for sustenance and comfort. The best instance is perhaps that of the ox,
whose services, early exploited to the full, were cheaply obtained at the
cost of his rearing and keep. Hence he was kept. But in ages of conflict,
when might was right, the difference[1794] between an ox-servant and a
man-servant had in practice no existence, and the days of theory were
as yet in the far future. A human enemy, captured and spared, could be
put to use in the same way as a domesticated ox. His labour, minus the
cost of his keep, left a margin of profit to his owner. At the moment of
capture, his life was all he had: therefore his conqueror had deprived
him of nothing, and the bargain was in his favour, though economically in
his owner’s interest. No wonder then that our earliest records attest the
presence of the slave. Even nomad tribes were attended by slaves[1795]
in their migrations, nor indeed has this custom been wholly unknown in
modern times. On the other hand it is remarkable how very little we hear
of wage-earning labour in ancient agriculture. Nothing seems to imply
that it was ever a normal resource of cultivation. When employed, it is
almost always for special work at seasons of pressure, and it seems to
have remained on this footing, with a general tendency to decline. In
other words, the margin of profit on the results of wage-earning labour
seemed to employers less than that on the results of slave labour, so far
as ordinary routine was concerned. And we are not in a position to shew
that in their given circumstances their judgment was wrong. But we need
to form some notion of the position of the wage-earning labourer in a
civilization still primitive.

The main point ever to be borne in mind is that the family household was
a close union of persons bound together by ties of blood and religion
under a recognized Head. A common interest in the family property carried
with it the duty of common labour. The domestic stamp was on everything
done and designed. Even the slave had a humble place in the family life,
and family religion did not wholly ignore him. He was there, and was
meant to stay there. Farm-work was the chief item in the duties of the
household, and he bore, and was meant to bear, his full share of it. But
the hired labourer stood in no such relation to the household union,
however friendly his connexion with his employer might be. He did his
work, took his wage, and went: no tie was severed by his going, and any
other person of like capacity could fill his place if and when the need
for help-service arose. In short, his labour was non-domestic, irregular,
occasional: and therefore less likely to receive notice in such records
as have come down to us. But if we conclude (as I am inclined to do) that
wage-labour was not much employed on the land in early times, we must
admit that this is rather an inference than an attested tradition.

The distinction between domestic regular service and non-domestic
help-service is essential, and on a small holding from which a family
raised its own sustenance the line of division was easy to draw. Later
economic changes tended to obscure it, and we find Roman jurists[1796]
of the Empire striving to discover a full and satisfactory answer to
a much later question, namely the distinction between a domestic and
a rustic slave. But by that time ‘domestic’ appears as ‘urban,’ for
the effect of centuries has been to draw a really important line of
division, not between slave and free but between two classes of slaves.
There is however in the conditions of early slavery, when ‘domestic’
and ‘rustic’ were merely two aspects of the same thing, another point
not to be overlooked, since it probably had no little influence on the
development of human bondage. It is this. The human slave differs from
the domesticated ox through possession of what we call reason. If he
wished to escape, he was capable of forming deep-laid plans for that
purpose. Now the captives in border wars would be members of neighbouring
tribes. If enslaved, the fact of being still within easy reach of their
kindred was a standing temptation to run away, sure as they would be
of a welcome in their former homes. No kindness, no watchfulness, on
the master’s part would suffice to deaden or defeat such an influence.
To solve the problem thus created, a way was found by disposing of
captives to aliens more remote and getting slaves brought from places
still further away. This presupposes some commercial intercourse. In the
early Greek tradition we meet with this slave-trade at work as a branch
of maritime traffic chiefly in the hands of Phoenician seamen. In Italy
we find a trace of it in the custom[1797] of selling ‘beyond Tiber,’
that is into alien Etruria. At what stage of civilization exactly this
practice became established it is rash to guess: we cannot get behind
it. The monstrous slave-markets of the historical periods shew that it
developed into a normal institution of the ancient world. But it is not
unreasonable to suppose that an alien from afar was less easily absorbed
into his master’s family circle than a man of a neighbouring community
though of another tribe. Are we to see in this the germ of a change by
which the house-slave became less ‘domestic’ and tended to become a human
chattel?

The exploitation of some men’s labour for the maintenance of others could
and did take another form in ages of continual conflict. Successful
invaders did not always drive out or destroy the earlier inhabitants
of a conquered land. By retaining them as subjects to till the soil,
and making the support of their rulers the first charge upon their
produce, the conquerors provided for their own comfort and became a
leisured noble class. In the Greek world we find such aristocracies of
a permanently military character, as in Laconia and Thessaly. Colonial
expansion reproduced the same or very similar phenomena abroad, as in
the cases of Heraclea Pontica and Syracuse. The serfdom of such subject
populations was a very different thing[1798] from slavery. It had nothing
domestic about it. There is no reason to suppose that the serf was under
any constraint beyond the regular performance of certain fixed duties,
conditions imposed by the state on its subjects, not the personal orders
of an individual owner. In some cases at least the serf seems to have
enjoyed a measure of protection[1799] under public law. Whether the
original Roman _plebs_ stood on much the same footing as the Greek serfs
is perhaps doubtful, but their condition presents certain analogies. The
main truth is that the desire of conquerors to profit by the labour of
the conquered was and is an appetite almost universal: moral revulsion
against crude forms of this exploitation is of modern, chiefly English,
origin; even now it is in no small degree a lesson from the economic
experience of ages. But it is well to remember that we use ‘serfdom’
also as the name for the condition of rural peasantry in the later Roman
Empire, and that this again is a different relation. For it is not a case
of conquered people serving their conquerors. Rather is it an affliction
of those who by blood or franchise represent the conquering people. Step
by step they sink under the loss of effective freedom, though nominally
free, bound down by economic and social forces; influences that operate
with the slow certainty of fate until their triumph is finally registered
by imperial law.

That the institution of Property is a matter of slow growth, is now
generally admitted by sincere inquirers. It had reached a considerable
stage of development when a clan or household (still more when an
individual) was recognized as having an exclusive right to dispose of
this or that material object presumably useful to others also. For
instance, in the right of an owner to do as he would with an ox or a
slave. Individual property in land was certainly a later development, the
appropriation being effected by a combination of personal acquisitiveness
with economic convenience. From my present point of view the chief
interest of the property-question is in its connexion with debt-slavery.
That farmers, exposed to the vicissitudes of seasons, are peculiarly
liable to incur debts, is well known from experience ancient and modern.
But ancient Law, if rudimentary, was also rigid; and tradition depicts
for us the small peasant as a victim of the wealthy whose larger capital
enabled them to outlast the pressure of bad times. How far the details of
this picture are to be taken literally as evidence of solid fact has not
unreasonably been doubted. But that a farmer in straits could pledge not
only his land but his person as security for a debt seems hardly open to
question. For we find the practice still existing in historical periods,
and political pressure exerted to procure mitigation of the ancient
severity. Now, if a man gave himself in bondage to a creditor until such
time as his debt should be discharged, he became that creditor’s slave
for a period that might only end with his own life. Here we have another
way in which the man of property could get the disposal of regular labour
without buying a slave in the market or turning to work himself. A later
form of the practice, in which a debtor worked off his liability[1800] by
service at an estimated rate, a method of liquidation by the accumulation
of unpaid wages, seems to have been a compromise avoiding actual slavery.
Evidently subsequent to the abolition of debt-slavery, it died out in
Italy, perhaps partly owing to the troublesome friction that would surely
arise in enforcing the obligation.

It is natural to ask, if we find small trace of eagerness to labour in
person on the land, and ample tradition of readiness to devolve that
labour on slaves and subjects, how comes it that we find agriculture in
honour, traditionally regarded as the manual labour beyond all others
not unworthy of a freeman? To reply that human life is supported by the
produce of the land is no sufficient answer. To recognize the fact of
necessity does not account for the sentiment of dignity. Now, in the
formation of such unions as may fairly be called States, the commonest
if not universal phenomenon is the connexion of full citizenship
with ownership of land. Political movement towards democracy is most
significantly expressed in the struggles of landless members of inferior
right to gain political equality. Whether the claim is for allotments of
land, carrying a share of voting-power, or for divorcing the voting-power
from landholding, does not matter much here. At any rate it was the rule
that no alien could own land within the territory of the state, and state
and territory were coextensive. Only special treaties between states,
or a solemn act of the sovran power in a state, could create exceptions
to the rule. From this situation I would start in attempting to find
some answer to the above question. In a village community I think it is
generally agreed that all true members had a share of the produce, the
great majority as cultivators, holding lots of land, not as tenants at
will or by contract, but in their own right, though the parcels might be
allotted differently from time to time. If a few craftsmen were left to
specialize in necessary trades for the service of all, and drew their
share in the form of sustenance provided by the cultivating members, the
arrangement presented no insuperable difficulty on a small scale. But
the tillers of the soil were the persons on whose exertions the life
of the community primarily and obviously depended. The formation of a
larger unit, a State, probably by some successful warrior chief, made a
great change in the situation. A city stronghold established a centre
of state life and government, and villages exchanged the privileges and
perils of isolation for the position of local hamlets attached to the
common centre of the state, and in this new connexion developing what
we may fairly call political consciousness. Under the new dispensation,
what with growth of markets, the invention of coined money, and greater
general security, the movement towards individual property proceeded
fast. Noble families engrossed much of the best land: and tradition[1801]
credibly informs us that in one mode or other they imposed the labour of
cultivation on the poorer citizens, of course on very onerous terms.

At this point in the inquiry some help may be got from taking the
military view. War, at least defensive war, was a possibility ever
present. Kings, and the aristocracies that followed them, had as their
prime function to secure the safety of the state. A sort of regular force
was provided by the obligation of army service that rested upon all full
citizens. The warrior nobles and their kinsmen formed a nucleus. But the
free peasant farmers were indispensable in the ranks, and, as their farms
usually lay near the frontier, they furnished a hardy and willing militia
for border warfare. The craftsmen, smith potter cobbler etc, were now
more concentrated in the city, and were always regarded as ill-fitted
for service in the field. Naturally the classes that bore a direct part
in defence of the state stood higher in general esteem. But to say this
is not to say that bodily labour on the land was, as labour, honoured
for its own sake. The honour belonged to those who, owning land, either
worked it with their own hands or employed the labour of others. I can
find no trace of traditional respect for the labourer as labourer until
a much later age, when a dearth of free rustic labourers had begun to be
felt. Then it appeared in the form of yearning[1802] for a vanished past,
side by side with humanitarian views in relation to slavery. Meanwhile
a stage had been traversed in which slavery was recognized as necessary
in spite of its admitted evils, and therefore requiring justification;
a movement most clearly illustrated by the special pleading of
Aristotle. That great writer was fully alive to the manifold merits of
the farmer class as citizens and producers, but his trust in the power
of self-interest proves him a confirmed individualist. How to combine
self-interest with patriotic devotion to the common welfare is the vital
problem, even now only solved ideally on paper. That coldly-reasoned
conclusions of thinkers were really the foundation of the esteem in which
we find the working farmer held, I cannot believe. Much more likely is it
that it sprang mainly from immemorial tradition of a time when ownership
and cultivation went together, and that theory merely absorbed and
revived what was still an indistinct impression in the minds of men.

The Greeks had a significant word, ἀυτουργός, the usage of which may
serve to illustrate my meaning. That it connotes the fact of a man’s
bearing a personal part in this or that work is clear on the face of
it. That no other person also bears a part, is sometimes implied by the
context, but it is not necessarily contained in the word itself. To put
it differently, he does his own work, not necessarily all his own work.
I note two points in connexion with it that seem to me important. First,
it is so often used as descriptive of rustic labour that it seems to have
carried with it associations of farm-life: most of the other uses are
almost metaphorical, some distinctly so. Secondly, I have never found it
applied to the case of a slave. Why? I think, because it conveyed the
further notion of working not only yourself but for yourself. If in some
passages it is not quite certain that an owner (rather than a tenant) is
referred to, surely this extension of meaning is not such as to cause
surprise. It is not enough to suggest serious doubt that the common and
full sense of the word was that a man did work with his own hands on his
own account on his own land. This was the character to which immemorial
tradition pointed; and, whenever tenancy under landlords began, the
word fitted the working tenant-farmer well enough. The Romans had the
tradition in the most definite form, though Latin furnished no equivalent
word. Their literature, moralizing by examples and unapt for theory, used
it as material for centuries. But neither in the Greek world nor in Italy
can I detect any reason for believing that the peasant farmer, idealized
by later ages, is rightly to be conceived as a person unwilling to employ
slave labour—if and when he could get it. The tradition, in which rustic
slaves appear from very early times, seems to me far more credible than
late legends of a primitive golden age in which there were no slaves at
all. That a man, to be enslaved, must first have been free, is a piece
of speculation with which I am not here concerned.

Tradition then, looking back to times when landowner and citizen were
normally but different sides of the same character, both terms alike
implying the duty of fighting for the state, idealized and glorified this
character with great but pardonable exaggeration of virtues probably
not merely fictitious. The peasant citizen and producer was its hero.
As the devolution of bodily labour upon slaves or hirelings became more
common with the increase of commerce and urban life, and the solid
worth of a patriot peasantry became more evident in the hour of its
decay, men turned with regret to the past. And the contrast of the real
present with an idealized past naturally found a significant difference
in the greater or less willingness of men to work with their own hands,
particularly on the land. But it was the labour of free citizens, each
bearing an active part in the common responsibilities of the state and
enjoying its common protection, that was glorified, not labour as in
itself meritorious or healthy. The wholesomeness of rustic toil was not
ignored, but to urge it as a motive for bodily exertion was a notion
developed by town-bred thinkers. That it coloured later tradition is not
wonderful: its recognition is most clearly expressed in the admission
of superior ‘corporal soundness’ in the sparely-fed and hard-worked
slave or wage-earner. But labour as labour was never, so far as I can
learn, dignified and respected in Greco-Roman civilization. Poverty, not
choice, might compel a man to do all his own work; but, if he could and
did employ hired or slave labour also, then he was an ἀυτουργός none
the less. This I hold to be an underlying fact that Roman tradition in
particular is calculated to obscure. It was voluntary labour, performed
in a citizen’s own interest and therefore a service to the state, that
received sentimental esteem.

The power of military influences in ancient states is often cited as
a sufficient explanation of the social fact that non-military bodily
labour was generally regarded with more or less contempt. The army being
the state in arms, the inferiority of those who did not form part of it
though able-bodied was manifest to all. This is true as far as it goes,
but there was something more behind. Why does not the same phenomenon
appear in modern states with conscript armies, such as France or Italy
or above all Switzerland? I think the true answer is only to be found by
noting a difference between ancient and modern views as to the nature
and limits of voluntary action. It is only of states in which membership
is fairly to be called citizenship that I am speaking; and as usual
it is Greek conditions and Greek words that supply distinct evidence.
Not that the Roman conditions were materially different, but they were
perhaps less clearly conceived, and the record is less authentic and
clear. Now, beyond the loyal obedience due from citizen to state, any
sort of constraint determining the action of one free man by the will
of others was feared and resented to a degree of which we cannot easily
form an adequate notion. In the gradual emancipation of the commons from
the dominion of privileged nobles, the long struggle gave a passionate
intensity to the natural appetite for freedom. And the essence of
freedom was the power of self-disposal. This power was liable to be lost
permanently by sale into slavery, but also from time to time by the
effect of temporary engagements. The most obvious instance of the latter
condition was the bondage created by unpaid debt. Hence the persistent
and eventually successful fight to make it illegal to take a borrower’s
person as security for his debt. But, suppose the debt cancelled by the
seizure of his goods, the man was left a pauper. His only resource was
to work for wages, and this placed him for the time of his engagement at
the full disposal[1803] of his employer. If he was not a master’s slave
for good and all, he would be passing from master to master, ever freshly
reminded of the fact that his daily necessities subjected him to the will
of others, nullifying his freeman’s power of self-disposal. If he worked
side by side with slaves, there was a further grievance. For the slave,
in whom his owner had sunk capital, had to be kept fed and housed to
retard his depreciation: the free labourer depended[1804] on his wage,
liable to fail. The situation, thus crudely stated, was intolerable.
In practice it was met, first by devotion to handicrafts as a means of
livelihood in which the winning of custom by skill relieved the worker
from direct dependence on a single master; but also by allotments of land
in annexed territory, and sometimes (as at Athens) by multiplication of
paid state-employments.

Of ordinary artisans, as distinct from artists, it may be said that
their position varied according as their special trades were more or
less esteemed by contemporary sentiment. The successful could and did
employ[1805] helpers, usually slaves. In urban populations they were an
important element, particularly in those where military considerations
were not predominant. The accumulation of capital, and the introduction
of industries on a larger scale in factory-workshops with staffs of
slaves, may have affected some trades to their disadvantage, but on the
whole the small-scale craftsmen seem generally[1806] to have held their
ground. Unskilled labour on the other hand was generally despised. It
was as a matter of course chiefly performed by slaves. If a citizen
was compelled by want to hire out his bodily strength, this was not
voluntary: complete submission to another’s will, even for a short
time, made the relation on his part virtually servile. Accordingly
philosophers, when they came to discuss such topics, came to the
conclusion that the need of such unskilled labour proved slavery to be
‘according to nature,’ a necessary appliance of human society. When the
Stoic defined a slave as a lifelong hireling, he gave sharp expression
to what had long been felt as a true analogy. For, if the slave was a
lifelong hireling, the hireling must be a temporary slave. Romans could
borrow the thought, but with them practice had preceded theory.

In making comparisons between wage-earning ancient and modern we come
upon a difficulty which it is hardly possible to set aside or overcome.
A slave could be hired from his owner, just as a freeman could be hired
from himself. The difference between the two cases would be clearly
marked[1807] in the modern world, and language would leave no room for
misunderstanding. But many passages in ancient writers leave it quite
uncertain whether the hirelings referred to are free or slave. The
point is an important one, particularly to inquirers who attempt to
estimate the relative economic efficiency of free and slave labour. For
the immediate interest of the freeman is to get a maximum of wage for
a minimum of work: the ultimate interest of the hired slave was often
to improve his own prospect of manumission. The custom was to allow
the slave to retain a small portion of his wage. Now this stimulus to
exertion was manifestly to the interest of the employer, who may even
have made it a part of his bargain with the owner. The slave, alive to
the chance of laying up a little store for the eventual purchase of his
freedom, was induced to work well in order to be kept employed on these
terms. The owner drew a steady income from his capital sunk in slaves,
and the system was thus convenient to all parties. We may add that, by
causing a slave to take thought for his own future, this plan encouraged
him to take reasonable care of his own health, and so far retarded his
progressive deterioration as an investment; while his owner stood to
recover the slave’s hoarded wage-portion in the form of redemption-money
on manumission of his worn-out slave. There is reason to think that
slave labour under these conditions was often more efficient than free.
Unhappily we have no direct discussion of the question from ancient
observers, who did not take this point of view, though well aware of the
influence of prospective manumission in producing contentment.

But how far was this comparatively genial arrangement applicable to the
ruder forms of unskilled labour? Take for instance mining. Freemen would
have none of it, and the inhuman practices of exploiters were notorious.
Yet hired slaves were freely employed. Owners knew that their slaves
were likely to waste rapidly under the methods in use, and at Athens a
common stipulation was that on the expiry of a contract the gang hired
should be returned in equal number, the employer making good the losses
certain to occur in their ranks. Here we have the mere human chattel,
hopeless and helpless, never likely to receive anything but his keep, as
an engine receives its fuel and oil, but differing in this, that he was
liable to cruel punishment. Such labourers could not work for a freedom
that they had no prospect of living to enjoy. And how about the case of
agriculture? That freemen did work for wages on farms we know, but we
hear very little of them, and that little almost entirely as helpers at
certain seasons. So far as I have been able to learn, free wage-labour
did not really compete with slave labour in agriculture: moreover the
hired man might be a hired slave, while migratory harvesters, probably
freemen, appear at least in some cases as gangs hired for the job under
a ganger of their own, responsible to the employer for their conduct and
efficiency. Most significant is the almost complete absence of evidence
that rustic slaves had any prospect of manumission. In former chapters
I have commented on this fact and noted the few faint indications of
such an arrangement. At all events the crude plantation-system, while it
lasted, was a work-to-death system, though worn-out survivors may have
had a better lot than miners, if allowed to exist as old retainers on
the estate. But cultivation by slave labour for the purpose of raising
an income for the landlord was, even in its later improved organization,
a system implying brutal callousness, if not downright cruelty. Slave
stewards and overseers, at the mercy of the master themselves, were
naturally less concerned to spare the common hands than to escape the
master’s wrath. When writers on agriculture urge that on all grounds it
is wise to keep punishments down to a minimum, the point of their advice
is surely a censure of contemporary practice.

Now in modern times, humanitarian considerations being assumed, the
prevailing point of view has been more and more a strictly economic and
industrial one. It has been assumed that the freedom of an individual
consists first and foremost in the freedom to dispose of his own labour
on the best available terms. And this freedom rests on freedom to move
from place to place in search of the best labour-market from time
to time. But the movement and the bargaining have been regarded as
strictly voluntary, as in a certain sense they are. The power to migrate
or emigrate with the view of ‘bettering himself’ is conferred on the
wage-earner by modern facilities for travel, and new countries readily
absorb additional labour. But experience has shewn that free bargaining
for wages is not seldom illusory, since the man of capital can bide
his time, while the poor man cannot. Still, when every allowance has
been made on this score, it is true that the modern labourer, through
freedom of movement, has far more power of self-disposal than the
wage-earner of the Greco-Roman world. That his position is strengthened
and assured by the possession of political power, is not without ancient
analogies: but a difference in degree if not in kind is created by the
wide extension of the franchise in modern states, and its complete
separation in principle from the ownership of land. That is, the basis
of citizenship is domicile: for citizen parentage is not required, but
easily supplemented[1808] by legal nationalization. Moreover, religion is
no longer a necessary family inheritance, but the choice of individuals
who can generally gratify their preferential sentiments in surroundings
other than their birthplace. Compare this position with the narrow
franchises of antiquity and their ineffectiveness on any large scale,
their normally hereditary character, the local and domestic limitation
of religious ties, the restricted facilities for travel, not to mention
its ever-present perils. Remember that to reside in another state as an
alien did not, in default of special treaty or act of legislative grace,
give the resident any claim to civic rights in his place of residence,
while misfortune might at any time reduce him to slavery in a foreign
land. Surely under such conditions the limits of purely voluntary action
were narrow indeed. The lure of the wage and the fear of unemployment are
often a severe form of pressure, but they are, as fetters on freedom, a
mere nothing in comparison with this.

Considerations such as those set forth in the preceding paragraphs shew
that in treating of ancient agriculture and farm-labour we are apparently
faced by a curious paradox. Cultivation of land (including the keeping
of live stock) is an honourable pursuit. That good health, sustenance,
even comfort and profit, are its natural attendants, is not doubted.
But the position of the labouring hands is painful and mean, so much so
that a common punishment for urban house-slaves was to send them to work
on a farm. The rustic slave’s lot differed for the better from that of
the mine-slave in the healthier nature of the occupation, but in little
else. And this degradation inevitably reacted on the estimate of rustic
wage-earners, whenever employed. There may have been less repugnance
to work side by side with slaves than has been felt in modern times,
when a marked colour-line implied the disgrace of a ‘white’ man doing
‘niggers’ work.’ But it is not to be doubted that in agriculture as in
other occupations the presence of slavery did degrade labour, at all
events so soon as agriculture put on anything of an industrial character.
The really ‘respectable’ person was the man who directed the operations,
the γεωργός, _agricola_, or _colonus_ (in the original sense): he was
the man who worked the land and made it yield crops, whether he took
part in the actual digging and ploughing or not. The larger the scale,
the more he confined himself to direction, necessarily; but he was the
producer, a pillar of public economy, none the less. He had provided
the labour, bought or hired; in effect, the labour was his own. With
the toiling yeoman farmer of tradition he had this in common, that both
worked for themselves, not for another. And this position, attractive
in all societies, was marked out with peculiar distinctness through the
institution of slavery underlying the social fabric. Exploitation of
man by man, the first beginnings of which elude our search and are only
ascertained by inference, suggests some sort of superiority in the upper
party. At all events the master, the man who has the upper hand, gets the
credit of achievement, and in agriculture as elsewhere the subordinate
operative is inevitably forgotten. It is from this point of view that
we must regard the fine Roman legends of sturdy farmer-citizens, the
fathers of the Republic. They are idylls conveying truth, dressed up by
the imagination of a later age: and have their place in the region where
history and poetry meet and blend. We must not gather from them that
slavery was exceptional or a fact of no importance. Tradition habitually
ignores what is normal and therefore assumed. The fairer inference is
that, as I have already remarked, slavery was in those early days still a
family institution, not an industrial system.

Some help towards the understanding of the different position of manual
labour in ancient times as compared with modern may be got by considering
Abolitionism. That a slave is a man, and as such not to be wholly
ignored in respect of the claims of common humanity; that slave-labour
is listless and ineffective, giving poor returns in proportion to the
strength employed; these conclusions, moral and economic, were reached by
the thinkers of the ancient world while their civilization was in full
bloom. Why then do we find no movement corresponding to the Abolitionism
of modern times? Two things were obviously necessary for such a movement;
the motive to inspire it, and the force to give effect to it. Let men
once be convinced that slavery is both wrong and unprofitable, and let
them have the power to insist on putting an end to it, Abolitionism in
some form or other is the necessary result.

Now in speaking of ancient conditions we must never lose sight of the
fact that in its origin slavery was a favour. By the undissembled rule
of force the conquered only retained his life through the mercy of the
conqueror. By a contract tacit or expressed he was pledged for life
to the service and profit of his master. And the master could, if his
interest pointed that way, make over his rights to a third party. Hence
the growth of a slave-market, and the relation of master and slave no
longer was normally that of individual conqueror and conquered. But the
original notion was by no means extinct, and it continued to colour the
current view of slavery as ‘natural,’ a thing of course, an unquestioned
social fact. Nor was there anything in the condition of the slave to
arouse a feeling of horror, so long as patriarchal rule prevailed. If the
Head of the family possessed absolute power over the slave, his power
over members of the family in general was in kind the same. The bondman,
a humble dependant rather than a mere chattel, was in a sense also a
member of the family and under the protection of the household gods. What
was there for an observer, let him be ever so kind-hearted, to object
to? Accordingly, as the state developed, it too kept slaves of its own,
employing them in mean functions for which it was needful to have a staff
always at hand. In short, the institution was taken for granted, and
growing intercourse with foreigners only served to reveal its universal
prevalence.

How came it then that in course of time humanitarian scruples arose,
and questioners were found to argue that the system was ‘unnatural’ and
wrong? The answer must be sought in the application of an originally
domestic institution to industrial ends. Once the stage was reached at
which the products of labour were habitually put on the market, and the
producer got his living by their regular sale, it was soon discovered
that to produce and deal on a larger scale was more economical, and
therefore more profitable, than on a smaller one. In the handicrafts this
was so obvious that slave assistants were commonly kept by tradesmen:
it was important to be sure of having the necessary help when wanted.
The same was the case in the professions based on special training:
the surgeon, the architect, the surveyor, the banker, employed slave
subordinates, and had often been slaves themselves. In all these
departments, not to mention domestic service, the position of the slave
was affected by two important considerations. First, he was one of a
few, and under immediate observation, so that escape from servitude
was practically impossible. Secondly, there was a reasonable chance of
earning manumission by long faithful service. But there were occupations
in which it was far more difficult to reconcile the interests of the
slave with those of the master. Such were the exploitation of mines
and quarries, in which labour was simply applied in the form of brute
force under direction. The direction, usually entrusted to slave or
freedman overseers, was generally unsympathetic, sometimes cruel; for the
overseer’s first thought was to please his master, even if he could only
do so by working the slaves to death. The extension of agriculture as a
means of profit rather than subsistence created conditions of the same
kind in this occupation. It was here that the monstrous abuses incidental
to slavery were most strikingly displayed. For, while quarries and mines
were only worked in a few localities, the plan of working great landed
estates by the labour of slave-gangs was applicable to vast areas of the
best soil. And in Africa Sicily and Italy we find it so applied for the
profit of the nobles and capitalists of a conquering race.

The evils of this system may be set down to the account of obsequious
stewards heartlessly wringing profit for their masters out of human flesh
and blood. But we must not ignore two considerations which suggest that
the root of the evil lay not in the caprice or greed of individuals but
in the attempt to carry on rural industry by slave labour at all. In
the country, opportunities of escape were many; the slave-prison and
the fetters could hardly be dispensed with if you meant to keep your
farm-hands at disposal. And manumission, as a means of encouraging good
service, was evidently not of much avail in country places. For after
long years of exhausting labour the worn-out slave would be unable to
earn a living by hard bodily work; and he knew no other. He had been
bought as a flesh-and-blood machine; as such, to manumit him while still
efficient would be a sacrifice of sunk capital for which nobody was
prepared. It seems that the ordinary practice was to keep him at work
till he could work no longer, and then to let him linger on the estate
as an invalid retainer, feeding on what he could get and decaying in
peace. But the industrializing of agriculture, heartlessly selfish in its
aims, tempted landlords to shirk the unprofitable maintenance of spent
labourers. When a slave was no longer worth his keep, it might pay to
sell him at once for what he would fetch. There was thus a mouth less
to be fed, and the problem of how to turn the remnant of his strength
to account was shifted on to his new owner. This plan, approved by the
elder Cato as a detail of farm-economy, marks the change of relations
between master and slave in rustic life. The old domestic relation has
disappeared in the brutal exploitation of a human animal for immediate
profit. The crudely industrial system reproduced on great estates the
horrid phenomena of the quarry and the mine.

That humane and thoughtful men should be disgusted with such doings was
inevitable, and disgust was soon reinforced by reasonable alarm. For
tillage was not the sole occupation of rustic enterprise. It was found
that in many districts grazing paid better than tillage, and the two
could be worked together remuneratively on a large scale. The charge of
flocks and herds, shifting their pasture according to seasons, led to
employment of able-bodied slaves in a duty responsible and at the same
time removed from immediate control for months together. These slave
herdsmen, hardy and used to a free life in wild uplands, had to face
wolves and robbers, and therefore to bear arms. We need not dwell on the
danger from such a class menacing the peace of a country unprotected by
rural police. It was real enough. Being slaves, they had nothing but
their lives to lose, and their lives it was their owners’ interest to
protect. Meanwhile the unescorted traveller was at their mercy, and any
peasants within reach would pay blackmail to escape their raids. Yet
nothing was done to get rid of the nuisance and peril of this state of
things. Servile risings were clumsily put down with appalling bloodshed,
and left to recur. Meanwhile the free population of the countryside
diminished, and prosperity could not be restored by new slave-gangs.
Such was notoriously the condition of a great part of rural Italy under
the later Republic, and contemporary evidence clearly shews that the
improvement effected under the Empire was slight.

Now, when experience had proved the blighting influence of slavery,
why was there no movement to do away with the system altogether? Truth
is, there was at present no basis to start from. The moral enthusiasm,
often sincere, that has inspired such movements in modern times, had no
effective existence. Moral considerations were almost entirely confined
to a section of rich or cultivated society. It was not expected that the
common herd should rise above the meanest motives of crude self-interest.
The artisan, who either employed, or hoped soon to employ, a slave or
two, was not likely to condemn slavery: the parasitic loafer was not
likely to welcome a mass of new competitors for the doles and bribes that
he undeservedly enjoyed. During the last century of the Roman Republic
no opposition to slavery as an institution could have arisen from the
urban populace. And the wealthier classes were interested in slavery.
Religion did not touch the question. A few scrupulous and thoughtful men
might have supported an anti-slavery movement, had there been one; but we
have not the smallest reason to think that any individual ever dreamt of
starting humanitarian propaganda on his own account and at his own risk.
There was no place in the ancient world for the reformer of this type.
Even those leaders whose policy offered advantages to the free masses,
such as the Gracchi or some Spartan kings, did not so fare in their
enterprises as to encourage imitation. As for appealing to the slaves
themselves, it was only desperate adventurers who did so, and that only
to use their force in promoting criminal designs. Such cases only served
to justify the cruel execution of cruel laws for protecting masters and
the state in general from the imminent slave-peril. If we turn from the
city, in which what passed for politics ran its troubled and futile
course, to the countryside, we are at once in a scene from which all
political life had departed. The farmer-citizens grew fewer and fewer,
and the great majority of them were virtually disfranchised by distance.
Nor were they likely to favour any movement that seemed to be for the
benefit of slaves.

The establishment of the Empire did not, indeed could not, produce any
material change in the way of arousing effective sentiment hostile to
slavery. But it did much to promote internal order and far-reaching
peace. Under the new model of government the corrupt circles of nobles
and greedy capitalists were no longer in absolute control of the
civilized world, and it might seem that there was now some chance of
dealing with the canker of slavery. But no such movement was the result.
Old notions remained in full vigour. Augustus had his hands too full,
and the need of conciliating private interests was too pressing, for
him to disturb them, even had he been minded to do so. And who else
could take the initiative? But the fate of two moral influences is
worth noting. Stoicism, the creed of not a few ardent spirits, might
profess to rise superior to worldly distinctions and advantages and
assert the potential dignity of man even in the humblest condition of
life. But it was always a creed of the few: its aloofness, tending to
a certain arrogance, made it unfitted[1809] to lead a great reform: it
neither would nor could furnish the machinery of zealous propaganda.
In the earlier Empire we find it politically allied with malcontent
cliques in which smouldering resentment at the restraints on ‘freedom’
expressed itself by idealizing the Republic and hoping for a reaction.
Thus it lost itself in impracticable dreams, and the hand of emperors
under provocation sometimes fell heavily on its most virtuous men. The
spread of Christianity came later, and was not diverted from its aims
by a social affinity with the upper classes. Slaves bore no small part
in its expansion to the West, and it was free to operate steadily as a
humanitarian influence. But its claim to universality naturally exposed
it to grave suspicion in a world that knew religion only as an affair
of each several community, with a sort of overlordship vested in the
conquering gods of Rome. Though it was a Church and not a philosophic
system, though meant for all mankind and not for a cultivated few, it
could only win its way by accepting civilization[1810] in the main as it
stood. Therefore it was compelled to accept slavery as an institution,
and to content itself with inculcating humanity on masters and
conscientious devotion to duty on slaves. If Abolitionism was to spring
from this seed, a long time had to be spent in waiting for the harvest.

Yet the establishment of the Empire did lead to effects that in their
turn served as contributory causes undermining the old slave-system,
particularly[1811] in agriculture. In a more peaceful age fewer slaves
were brought to market, and this meant higher prices and put a premium
on the economical employment of bought labour. To meet the situation,
agricultural policy was developed on two lines, each of which was the
improvement or extension of an existing practice. One was the more
scientific organization of the labour-staff, so as to get better results
from an equal amount of labour. The other was a more frequent resort to
the plan of letting farms to tenants, whenever that arrangement seemed
favourable to the landlord’s interest. Of these developments we have
direct information from Columella, who still prefers the former plan
wherever feasible. But it was with the system of tenancies on various
conditions that the future really lay. I have endeavoured above to sketch
the process[1812] by which tenants were gradually reduced to a condition
of dependency on their landlords, and the difficulty of finding and
keeping good tenants that was the other side of the movement. A very
significant detail is the fact that slaves were put into farms[1813] as
tenants: that this was no unusual practice is clear from the way in which
the classical jurists refer to it as a matter of course. And so things
slowly moved on, with ups and downs, the tenants slave or free becoming
more and more bondsmen of the land, liable to task-services and not
free to move at will. Thus by usage, and eventually by law, a system of
serfdom was established, while personal slavery declined.

Looked at from an Abolitionist point of view, we are here dealing with
a sheer evasion of the slavery-question. But this was inevitable. The
imperial government, which alone had the power necessary for attempting
solutions of grave problems, was doomed to become more and more
mechanical. Under great strains in the third century it lost its vital
forces to such a degree that it was powerless for internal betterment.
The later despotic Empire, seeing the failure of past policy, could find
no better way than to do as before[1814], only more mechanically and more
thoroughly. What little of freedom of movement and of self-disposal still
remained to the toiling classes accordingly disappeared. Once a certain
number had been slaves; now none were practically free. Diminution of
personal slavery had not increased personal freedom. The attempt to
confine all labour to fixed grooves and rigid rules was a last desperate
effort to control and employ the resources of ancient civilization, in
the hope of thus finding means sufficient to endure the ever-growing
strain upon the empire. This system might serve its purpose for the
moment, but it was a vain device, killing enterprise and working out
its own ruin through its own stagnation. In agriculture, on which the
whole fabric rested, its effects were particularly ruinous: for in no
occupation is there greater need of constant forethought and loving care,
which the prospect of private advantage alone can guarantee. All these
phenomena may assure us that as yet there was no clear understanding of
the value of free self-disposal as the economic basis of society. From
the moral point of view no genuine progress was to be looked for in a
stagnant age. The transition from normal slavery to gild-bondage and
normal land-serfdom does not seem to have been affected by the spiritual
levelling of Christianity. But that as she gained power, the Church
did something to mitigate[1815] the hardness of the time, is not to be
doubted.

I need not dwell at length on the contrast presented by modern
anti-slavery movements. The influence of religion, personal and
humanitarian, is alone enough to account for the new spirit aroused
and organized by Clarkson and Wilberforce. To put down the slave-trade
because it was wrong was a momentous step, and emancipation its
inevitable corollary, costly though it might be. That the reform was
carried out two generations before the handworking masses of England
gained political power is a most notable fact. For it is not possible
to connect the achievement with the natural jealousy of free labour
objecting to competition of slave labour. In the United States the
motives for Abolition were necessarily more mixed, but sincere fanatics,
religious and violent, were the leaders of the crusade. But the
repugnance of free labour to the recognition of slavery in any part of
the Republic (and it was this sentiment that furnished the necessary
voting-power) was not so purely philanthropic. Students of American
history are well aware of the moral change brought about by a single
mechanical invention in the southern states. The economic advantages
of the cotton-gin made slavery so profitable that existing tendencies
towards emancipation died out in the South. A new life was given to a
confessed evil, and the developed plantation-system, industrialized
for the profit of a few, went down the road of fate to end in tragedy.
The result of the great civil war at all events settled one question.
Henceforth labour was to stand on a footing of self-disposal and
wage-earning, with freedom to improve its conditions on those lines. The
solution, obtained at an awful cost, was final for the time: what will
be its ultimate outcome is at present (1919) a matter of some doubt, for
reasons not to be discussed here.

The fact that Abolitionism is a phenomenon of the modern[1816] world,
and not of the ancient, will not seem insignificant to those who have
read widely in the ancient writers and remarked how very little we hear
of free wage-earning labour. If we deduct the references to independent
artisans practising trades on a small scale (and their cases are not
relevant here), what we hear of mere wage-earners is very little indeed.
And of this little again only a part concerns agriculture. I take it
that we may fairly draw one conclusion from this: the wishes of the
free wage-earning class, whatever their numbers may have been, were
practically of no account in the ancient world. From first to last the
primitive law of superior force, the ‘good old rule’ of which slavery was
a product, was tacitly accepted. Civilization might undergo changes of
character, periods of peace might alternate with periods of war: still
bondage and labour were closely connected in men’s minds, and honest
labour as such commanded no respect. How could it? Of a golden age, in
which all men were free and slavery unknown, we have nothing that can
be called evidence. The curtain rises on a world in which one man is at
the full disposal of another. What is at first a small domestic matter
contains the germ of later developments; and in the case of agriculture
we see clearly how demands of an industrial nature transformed single
bond-service into the wholesale and brutal exploitation of human chattels
in slave-gangs. We have no good reason to believe that men ever in the
ancient world abstained from employing slave labour out of humanitarian
scruples. Scarcity of slaves, or lack of means to buy them, were
certainly the main restrictive influences. The institution was always
there, ready for extension and adaptation as changing conditions might
suggest. If ancient civilization did not rest on a basis of slavery, on
what did it rest? Assuredly not on free self-disposal. The man free to
dispose of himself claimed the right to dispose of others, up to the
limits of his own power and will. In this there is nothing wonderful.
We need not flatter ourselves that the rule of force is now extinct.
True, personal bondage to individuals is forbidden by law, but effective
freedom of self-disposal, perhaps an impossible dream, is not yet
realized: only its absence is dissembled under modern forms.

When I say that ancient civilization rested on a basis of slavery, the
condition present to my mind is this. A social and political structure
requires for its stability a reasonably sound economic foundation. This
foundation is found in the assured and regular use of natural resources.
And this use implies the constant presence of an obedient labour-force
that can be set to work and kept working as and when needed. This force
is now more and more supplied by machinery, the drudge that cannot
strike. Antiquity made the slave its quasi-mechanical drudge: the more or
less of slavery at a given moment simply depended on circumstances.

In returning to my original questions, whether the growth of Greco-Roman
civilization was in fact achieved through the system of slavery, and
whether it could conceivably have been accomplished without slavery, I
have I think given my answer to the first, that is, so far as agriculture
is concerned. And agriculture was the vital industry, on which the whole
fabric principally rested. As to the second question, I can give no
satisfactory answer. For my part, I agree with those who hold that, in
the conditions of antiquity as depicted in our traditions and inferred by
modern inquirers, slavery in some form and degree was an indispensable
condition of progress. States, organizations of a lasting kind, had
to be established by force. Captive labour, added to the resources of
conquerors, seems to be a powerful means of increasing their economic
strength and abridging the wasteful periods of conflict. But, once the
stage had been reached at which a state was sufficiently stable and
strong to provide for order within and to repel invaders, a slave-system
became a canker, economic, social, ultimately political. I believe that
the maladies from which the old Greco-Roman civilization suffered, and
which in the end brought about its decay and fall, were indirectly or
directly due to this taint more than to any other cause. I know of no
case ancient or modern in which a people have attained to a sound and
lasting prosperity by exploiting the servitude of other men. Serfdom or
slavery, it matters not. So far as human experience has gone, it appears
that all such conditions are eventually ruinous[1817] to the rulers.

For it is not merely the degradation of manual labour that results from
slavery. The deadening of inventive genius and economic improvements
is fatally promoted through the tendency to remedy all shortcomings by
simply using up more flesh and blood. Man abdicates a most important
function of his reason, and accepts a mere superiority of animal over
animal. This is surely not following the true law of his development. It
is from this point of view that the great scientific inventions of modern
times present an encouraging spectacle, as the earlier abuses of their
exploitation are gradually overcome, and the operative citizen vindicates
his claims as a human being. That ancient slavery did in some ways
act for good by guaranteeing leisure to classes some of whom employed
it well, may be freely admitted. But I do not think we can sincerely
extend the admission to include the case of Politics, whatever Greek
philosophers may have thought. Nor can we without reservations apply
it in the field of Art. On the other hand Literature surely owed much
to the artificial leisure created by slavery. Even in its most natural
utterances Greco-Roman literature is the voice of classes privileged
because free, not restrained by the cramping influences of workaday life
and needs. Its partisan spirit is the spirit of the upper strata of
society, ignoring the feelings, and often the existence, of the unfree
toilers below. In the main aristocratic, it tells us next to nothing
of the real sentiments of even the free masses, particularly on the
labour-questions that have now for some time increasingly occupied the
public mind. That we are, for good or for evil, viewing all matters of
human interest on a different plane from that of the ‘classic’ writers,
is a consideration that students of the Past are in duty bound never to
forget.

But, when we are told[1818] that ancient civilization in its early stages
(as seen in the Homeric poems etc) may fairly be labelled as Medieval,
while it may be called Modern when in its full bloom, we shall do well to
pause before accepting a dogma that may imply more than we are prepared
to grant. That mankind had to make a fresh start in the Middle Ages,
ancient civilization having run its course and failed, is a proposition
dangerously true. If it implies that the ‘free’ labour of modern times
is not a direct development from ancient slavery, so far good. If we
are to hold that ancient slave labour and modern free labour, when and
so far as each is a factor of economic importance, are practically
identical phenomena of capitalism eager to make a profit out of cheap
labour, we may ask—is the parallelism so exact as it is thus represented
to be? When we are told that the capitalist would nowadays prefer to
employ slave labour if it were to be had, and that the legal form in
which labour is supplied is a secondary consideration from the economic
point of view, we begin to hesitate: is this really true? Was not the
ineffectiveness of slave labour detected in ancient times? Was it not
proved to demonstration in America, as attested by the evidence of both
Northern and Southern witnesses? To reply that what capital wants is
not mere slave labour but efficient slave labour, would be no answer.
Capital is not, and never was, blind to the inefficiency of slave labour
as compared with free labour. In the pursuit of profit it needs a supply
of labour at its immediate and certain disposal; therefore it takes what
it can get. In the ancient world the unquestioned institution of slavery
offered a source of supply, not ideal, but such as could be relied on.
Therefore capital employed slavery to extend its operations, simply
turning existing conditions to account. And the admission, that the
most flourishing period of Greco-Roman civilization was also the period
in which slavery reached its greatest development, is surely a virtual
denial that the basis of that civilization was free labour. That is, free
wage-earning labour. For the independent farmer or artisan had nothing to
do with the matter: he worked for himself, not for another, and was on a
different plane from either wage-earner or slave. If he did not employ
either wage-earner or slave, it was because he found such help too costly
or a doubtful boon.

The case of agriculture at once reveals what was found to be the strong
point of slave labour, the feasibility of employing it in large masses.
Much of the work consisted in the mere mechanical use of brute force,
and one overseer could direct many hands. In operations dependent on
the seasons, the labour must be at hand to utilize opportunities. The
choice lay between slaves not working with a will and free wage-earners
not likely to be on the spot when wanted. Why were slaves preferred?
Because their presence in sufficient number could be relied on in the
existing conditions of the world. The history of industrial agriculture
was a long tale of effort so to organize slave labour as to get out of
it the greatest possible margin of profit. Not that slavery was thought
preferable in itself; but a means of wholesale cultivation had to be
found, and the then available resources of civilization offered no other.
When the supply of slaves began to fail, landlords sought a remedy in
letting some or all of their land to tenant farmers (extending an old
practice), not in attempting to farm on their own account with hired
labour. Hired labour remained as before, an occasional appliance to meet
temporary needs.

The use of the terms Medieval and Modern as labels[1819] for ancient
civilization in two clearly marked stages has, I repeat, just enough
truth in it to be dangerous. As a rhetorical flourish it may pass. But
it conveys by suggestion much that cannot be accepted. No doubt it is
not meant to imply that what we call the Middle Ages is to be ignored.
But it inevitably tends to stifle a belief in historical continuity, a
faith in which is the soul of historical inquiry as generally understood
in the present day. That modern labour-conditions shew a powerful
reaction against medieval, is obvious: that medieval conditions have not
influenced the modes of this reaction, is to me incredible. I do not
believe that the modern free wage-earning system could have grown out
of the ancient slave-labour system, had there been no such intervening
period as the ‘Middle Ages.’ That the aims of the capitalist ancient and
modern are the same, is a mere truism: but is not the same true of the
medieval capitalist also?

That the wage-earning handworker often finds his freedom of self-disposal
limited in practice, though his position is very far removed from
slavery, I have pointed out above. Also, that modern facilities for
movement have helped materially to assert and enlarge his freedom. From
this point of view the discovery of the New World was the turning-point
of European history. But in course of time capitalistic phenomena
appeared there also, and on a larger scale. And now, almost the whole
world over, the handworker is striving, not only for higher wages but
for more complete self-disposal. This necessitates some control of the
industries in which he works. Individual effort being vain, he forms
unions to guard his interests. The unions, acting by strike-pressure,
come into conflict with governments representing the state. The next
step is to employ political pressure by gaining and using votes under
representative systems, so as to remodel legislation and administration
in a sense favourable to the handworker. This movement, now well under
way in the most civilized countries, is not perhaps socialistic in
principle, and we do not yet know how far it is likely to take that turn.
In order to fight exploitation, the handworker has to surrender a good
deal of his individual freedom: whether he will be content to surrender a
good deal more, the coming age will see. This much at least is clear,—the
handworking wage-earners are no longer, as in the ancient world, a class
of no account. That they have wrung so many great concessions from
unwilling capitalists seems to me a proof that their freedom, even under
medieval[1820] restrictions, had always in it something real, some
quality that sharply distinguished it from ancient slavery. In ancient
slavery I can see no germ out of which betterment of labour-conditions
could conceivably arise. It simply had to die, and modern attempts to
revive it have had to die also.

In the foregoing pages I have recognized two lines of distinction. One is
that commonly admitted, the line that parts freeman from slave. The other
is that between free wage-earner and slave. In looking back from modern
circumstances to ancient, the latter is much the more important. For, now
that slavery in the proper sense has been abolished by modern civilized
peoples, the conditions of wage-earning stand out as presenting the most
momentous issues of the present age. To the statesmen the questions
raised are full of anxiety as to the probable influence of present
policies on future wellbeing. A student of Greco-Roman civilization must
ask himself whether modern labour-questions and their attempted solutions
may not indirectly furnish help in appraising and judging the conditions
of the past. Now it so happens that in the case of agriculture recent
events in Russia possess very marked significance, and it is therefore
hardly possible to leave them unnoticed here.

It seems to be established[1821] beyond reasonable doubt that the genuine
and effective doctrine of Leninite Bolshevism, in its definition of the
‘working class,’ excludes the peasantry. They are not ‘proletarian.’
That is, the great majority of peasants have something. This each wants
to keep, and if possible to augment. In short, they are Individualists.
Now Bolshevism builds on dogmas of Marxian Socialism, however much it
may warp their application, however widely it may depart from Marxian
theory in its choice of methods. Therefore it sees in the peasants only
a class of petty bourgeoisie with the anti-socialistic instincts of that
hated class, and will spare no effort to exclude them from political
power. It disfranchises employers, even though the work they do is
productive and useful to society. We need go no further: these principles
of the Bolshevik creed, be it prophetic vision or be it crazy fanaticism
blind to the facts of human nature and devoid of all practical sense of
proportion, are enough for my present purpose. It results from them that
all wage-earning is wrong: no man has the right to employ another man for
his own purposes: that the relation benefits both employer and employed,
even if true, is a consideration[1822] wholly irrelevant. For it is
promised that the new civilization, recast on the Bolshevik model, will
leave no room for wage-service of one man to another.

I am not to criticize this scheme of social and economic life, but to
look at it coolly as an illustrative fact. It is surely a significant
thing that, while slavery and serfdom are now reckoned as virtually
obsolete phenomena of the past, the old distinction, between the man who
works himself for himself and the man who works for another, is still
before us as the vital line of division in labour-questions. Bloodshed
and torture as means of enforcing the dogma may be confined to Russia,
but the distinction is at the bottom of industrial unrest all over the
world. Most significant of all is the admission that peasant landholders
are not a ‘proletariate.’ Of course they are not. But to philosophers
and statesmen of antiquity they appeared as an all-important class, not
only as producers of food but as a solid element of population, promoting
the stability of state governments. This stability was favourable to
continuity of policy and enabled all interests to thrive in peace.
Have the development of machinery and transport in recent times so far
altered the conditions of agriculture that this is no longer the case? In
other words, is the agricultural labourer, the present wage-earner, to
supersede the peasant landholder as the dominant figure of rustic life?
Is the large-scale farmer to survive only as the impotent figurehead of
rural enterprises? Is a political proletariate competent to regulate
the conduct of an industry directly dependent on soil climate and
seasons? Wherever man is in immediate contact with forces of nature,
in farm-life as in seafaring, the bodily energies of many can only be
effective through subordination to the mind of one. How far, under the
modern factory system, where the mill goes on as usual in all weathers,
direction by wage-earners may be a practicable proposition, I cannot
tell. That such a plan would be a failure on a farm, I have no doubt
whatever.

My general conclusion then is that the old distinction observable under
Greco-Roman civilization was in itself a sound one. Yet it led to no
lasting and satisfactory solution of agricultural labour-problems.
Many causes no doubt contributed to this failure; but the lack of a
satisfactory labour-system was probably the greatest. Neither slavery
nor serfdom was capable of meeting the need, and the wage-earning system
never grew so as efficiently to supersede them. Now, after centuries
of the wage-system, we are uneasily asking ourselves whether modern
civilization is gravely endangered through the failure of this system
also. It seems that in agriculture at least there are two possible
alternatives, either a final settlement of the wage-question on a footing
satisfactory to the labourer, or a return to αὐτουργία. Probably neither
of these will be found to exclude the other or to be equally applicable
to the circumstances of all countries. That communal ownership and
shifting tenure can be revived seems impossible under modern conditions,
whatever some Socialists may fancy. On the other hand voluntary
cooperation in marketing seems to have a great future before it. Of a
movement in that direction I have found no traces among the ancients: but
modern developments in the way of transport may remove many difficulties.
At any rate it is in such efforts of adaptation and compromise that
expert agriculturists seem to be looking for help. As to labour, slavery
and serfdom being excluded from modern civilized states, the coming
problem is how to secure the performance of agricultural work. The
choice lies between attractive wage-conditions, appealing to individual
interest, and the Socialist scheme of tasks carried out under official
direction, assumed to be in the best interests of a whole community. Both
plans offer a substitute for the crude compulsory methods vainly employed
in the ancient world. Which plan is the more suited to the demands of
human nature, whether self-disposal or communism is to be the dominant
aim and note of society, coming generations must decide.




APPENDIX.

SOME BYZANTINE AUTHORITIES.


To follow up the history of agricultural labour under the so-called
Byzantine empire, after the Roman empire had fallen in the West, is
beyond my scope. Yet there are certain matters on which light is thrown
by surviving documents that it is hardly possible wholly to ignore.
That the position of the agricultural classes did not follow the same
lines of development in East and West, is in itself a fact worth noting,
though not surprising. It may be said to run parallel with the general
fate of the two sections of the once Roman world. In the West[1823] the
growth of what we call Feudalism and the rise of new nation-states are
the phenomena that in the course of centuries gradually produced our
modern Europe. In the East the Empire long preserved its organization,
declining in efficiency and power, but rallying again and again, serving
as a bulwark of Christian Europe, and not extinguished finally till 1453.
It might perhaps have been guessed that the conditions of rustic life
would undergo some change, for the system of the later Roman colonate
was already shewing signs of coming failure in the time of Arcadius and
Honorius. The need of some system more favourable to individual energy
and enterprise, more to be trusted for production of food, was surely
not to be ignored. Food must have been a need of extreme urgency, with
armies constantly engaged in northern or eastern wars, and the mouths of
Constantinople ever hungry at home. After the Saracen conquest of Egypt
in the seventh century, the food-resources on which the government could
rely must have been seriously reduced, and the need greater than ever.
Thus we are not to wonder if we find indications of great interest taken
in agriculture, and direct evidence of reversion to a better land-system
than that of the later Roman colonate.


A. GEOPONICA.

The curious collection known as =Geoponica=[1824] comes down to us
in a text attributed to the tenth century, which is supposed to be a
badly-edited version of an earlier work probably of the sixth or early
seventh century. It is in a scrap-book form, consisting of precepts on a
vast number of topics, the matter under each heading being professedly
drawn from the doctrine of some author or authors whose names are
prefixed. Some of these are Byzantine writers, others of much earlier
date, including Democritus and Hippocrates, and the Roman Varro. Modern
critics consider these citations of names untrustworthy, the collector or
editor having dealt very carelessly with the work of his predecessors.
I can only say that an examination of the chapters that are of special
interest to me fully bears out this censure. I would add that a reference
to the index shews that Cato Columella Pliny (elder) and Palladius are
never cited, and express my suspicion that the omission of names is
not always a proof that those authors were disregarded as sources. The
general character of the work is unscientific and feeble, abounding in
quackery and superstition. Technical and dogmatic, it has nevertheless an
air of unreality, perhaps due in part to the later editor, but probably
in part to the original compiler, whose name is given as Cassianus
Bassus, a lawyer (σχολαστικός), apparently a Byzantine.

It has been remarked that the cultivation of corn fills but a small
space in the Geoponica, being evidently quite a subordinate department
of farm-life as there contemplated. Is this an indication that
Constantinople was still drawing plenty of corn from Egypt, and may
we infer that this feature is due to the original compiler, writing
before the loss of that granary-province? I do not venture to answer the
question.

The passages interesting from my point of view occur in the second book,
where some reference, scanty and obscure though it be, is made to labour
and labourers. A chapter (2) on the classes of labourers suited for
various kinds of work is a good specimen of this unsatisfactory treatise.
It is labelled Βάρωνος, but we may well hesitate to ascribe the substance
to Varro. The rules given are for the most part quite commonplace, and
I cannot trace them in Varro’s _res rustica_. On the other hand some of
them correspond to precepts of Columella. Whether this is their real
source, or whether they are traditional rules handed down carelessly by
previous compilers, perhaps on even earlier authority, I see no sure
means of determining. The doctrine that boys (παῖδες) should be employed
in field-labour (ἐργασία), to watch and learn from their experienced
elders, and the remark that their suppleness fits them better for
stooping jobs (weeding etc.), is new to me. Varro[1825] at least puts the
minimum age for field-hands at 22. Perhaps this doctrine comes from some
later authority, of a time when the old supply of adult field-hands was
evidently failing.

Another chapter, labelled as drawn from Florentinus (? first half of
third century), deals with the qualifications and duties of the ἐπίτροπος
or οἰκονόμος, the Roman _vilicus_. This chapter (44) is also quite
commonplace, and can be copiously illustrated out of many authors, from
Xenophon and Cato to Columella and Pliny. The exact meaning of one
passage (§ 3) is not clear to me, but its general drift is in agreement
with the rest. The notable point about the chapter is that it discusses
the steward and his staff as forming the ordinary establishment of a
farm. Are we to infer that this system was normal at the time when the
compiler put together the precepts under this head? Or is this a case of
unintelligent compilation, a mere passing-on of doctrines practically
obsolete by a town-bred writer in his study? I cannot tell. The
consideration of further details may give some help towards a judgment.

The next chapter (45), with the same label, treats of the steward’s diary
and the organization of the hands (ἐργάται). The main doctrine is that
every day must have its task, and every plan be punctually carried out,
since one delay upsets the whole course (τὴν τῆς ἐργασίας τάξιν) and
is bad for both crops and land. This again is stale enough, and may be
illustrated from Cato and Columella. The rules for organizing the hands
in groups of suitable size, so as to get a maximum of efficiency with a
minimum of overseers, agree closely with what we find in Columella. Thus
there is a strong probability that the labour intended is that of slaves.

In chapter 46, with same label, the subject is one of scale (περὶ μέτρου
ἐργασίας), the expression of several operations in terms of labour-units
(ἐργασίαι, _operae_). This also is an old story, capable of much
illustration from earlier writers. The work contemplated is that of a
vineyard. The way in which the hands (ἐργάται) are referred to is more
suited to a slave-staff than to wage-earners.

So too in chapter 47, with same label. It is περὶ τῆς τῶν γεωργῶν
ὑγιείας, enjoining general care of the men’s health and prescribing
remedies for various ailments. It seems taken for granted that the
hands will submit to the treatment imposed. Remembering the traditional
interest of the master in his slaves’ health, we can hardly doubt that
slaves are meant here.

Chapter 48, labelled as drawn from Didymus (? fourth or fifth century),
is a warning against ill-considered transplantation from better spots
to less wholesome ones. The reverse order is the right one. This rule
applies not only to plants (φυτά) but to farm-workers (γεωργόι) also. The
principle can be traced back to earlier writers. It seems assumed that
the men, like the plants, can be removed at the master’s will. Probably
slaves are meant, and we may recall the objections of Varro and Columella
to risking slave-property in malarious spots.

Chapter 49, labelled Βάρωνος, asserts the necessity of keeping such
artisans as smiths carpenters and potters on the farm or near at hand.
The tools have to be kept in good order, and visits to the town waste
time. That this precept comes from Varro I 16 §§ 3, 4, seems more than
doubtful: reference will shew that the passages differ considerably.

I would add that the argument prefixed to book III, a farmer’s calendar,
at least in Beckh’s text, gives a list of the months from January to
December, attaching to each Roman name the corresponding Egyptian one.
The editor apparently accepts this double list as genuine. If it be so,
has the fact any bearing on the relations between Constantinople and
Egypt referred to above?


B. THE FARMER’S LAW.

The so-called ‘=Farmer’s Law=,’ νόμος γεωργικός, is now assigned by the
critics to the time of the Iconoclast emperors, say about 740 AD. It is
an official document of limited scope, not a general regulative code
governing agricultural conditions in all parts of the eastern empire.
Its text origin arrangement and the bearing of its evidence have been
much discussed, and it will suffice here to refer to the articles of Mr
Ashburner[1826] on the subject. What concerns me is the position of
farmers under the Byzantine empire in the eighth century as compared with
that of the fourth or fifth century _coloni_, and the different lines
of development followed by country life in East and West. Therefore it
is only necessary to consider some of the main features of the picture
revealed to us by various details of the Farmer’s Law.

The first point that strikes a reader is that the serf[1827] _colonus_
has apparently disappeared. Land is held by free owners, who either
themselves provide for its cultivation or let it to tenants who take
over that duty. The normal organization is in districts (χωρία) each of
which contains a number of landowners, who either farm their own land
or, if short of means (ἄποροι), let it to other better-equipped farmers
of the same district. Thus the transactions are locally limited, and the
chief object of the law is to prevent misdeeds that might prejudicially
affect the prosperity of the local farmers. These are in a sense partners
or commoners (κοινωνοί), the ‘commonalty’ (κοινότης) of the district,
which is a taxation-unit with its members jointly liable. The district
seems to be regarded as originally common and then divided into members’
lots, with a part reserved perhaps as common pasture. Redivision is
contemplated, and the lots seem to belong rather to the family than to
the individual. To judge from the tone of the rules, it seems certain
that the farmers and their families are a class working with their own
hands. But there are also wage-earning labourers, and slaves owned or
hired for farm work. Tenancy on shares, like the partiary system in Roman
Law, appears as an established practice, and in one passage (clause
16) Mr Ashburner detects a farmer employed at a salary, in short a
_mercennarius_.

Thus we find existing what are a kind of village communities, the
landowning farmers in which are free to let land to each other and
also to exchange farms if they see fit to do so. How far they are free
to flit from one commune to another remains doubtful. And there is no
indication that they are at liberty to dispose of their own land-rights
to outsiders. There appears however side by side with these communal
units another system of tenancies in which individual farmers hire land
from great landlords. Naturally the position of such tenants is different
from that of tenants under communal owners: the matter is treated at some
length by Mr Ashburner. What proportion the corn crop generally bore to
other produce in the agriculture of the Byzantine empire contemplated by
these regulations, the document does not enable us to judge. Vineyards
and figyards were clearly an important department, and also gardens for
vegetables and fruit. Live stock, and damage done to them and by them,
are the subject of many clauses, nor is woodland forgotten. But the olive
does not appear. So far as one may guess, the farming was probably of a
mixed character. The penalties assigned for offences are often barbarous,
including not only death by hanging or burning but blinding and other
mutilations of oriental use. At the same time the ecclesiastical spirit
of the Eastern empire finds expression in the bestowal of a curse on one
guilty of cheating, referring I suppose primarily to undiscovered fraud.

The state of things inferred from the provisions of the ‘Farmer’s Law’
is so remarkable in itself, and so different from the course of rustic
development in the West, that we are driven to seek an explanation of
some kind. Many influences may have contributed to produce so striking
a differentiation. But one can hardly help suspecting that there was
some one great influence at work in the eastern empire, to which the
surprising change noted above was mainly due. In his _History of the
later Roman Empire_[1828] Professor Bury has offered a conjectural
solution of the problem. It is to be sought in the changes brought
about in the national character and the external history of the Empire.
Since the middle of the sixth century north-west Asia Minor and the
Balkan country had been filled with Slavonic settlers, and other parts
with other new colonists. Now the new settlers, particularly the Slavs,
were not used to the colonate system or the rigid bond of hereditary
occupations, and emperors busied in imperial defence on the North and
East knew better than to force upon them an unwelcome system. Invasions
had reduced the populations of frontier provinces and shattered the old
state of serfdom. Resettlement on a large scale had to be carried out
within the empire, and under new conditions to suit the changed character
of the population. Among the new elements that produced this change the
most important was the coming of the Slavs.

For the Slavs had themselves no institution corresponding to the German
_laeti_. Slaves indeed they had, but not free cultivators attached to
the soil. Therefore they could not, like the Germans in the West, adapt
themselves to the Roman colonate; accordingly their intrusion led to
its abolition. In support of this view the well-known Slavonic peasant
communities are cited as evidence. Nor can it be denied that this
consideration has some weight. But, while we may provisionally accept the
conclusion that Slavonic influences had something, perhaps much, to do
with the new turn given to the conditions of rustic life in the East, we
must not press it so far as to infer that the colonate-system was extinct
there. In no case could the ‘Farmer’s Law’ fairly be used to prove
the negative: and moreover it is apparently the case according to Mr
Ashburner that the document is not a complete agricultural code for all
agricultural classes within the empire. If it is ‘concerned exclusively
with a village community, composed of farmers who cultivate their own
lands,’ it cannot prove the non-existence of other rustic conditions
different in kind. Colonate seems to have disappeared, while slavery
has not. But that is the utmost we can say. The slave at least is still
there. As to the important question, whether the farmers contemplated in
the Law enjoy a real freedom of movement, as has been thought, it is best
to refer a reader to the cautious reserve of Mr Ashburner.

The one general inference that I venture to draw from these two
authorities is that, however much or little the conditions of agriculture
may have changed in the surviving Eastern part of the Roman empire, the
employment of slave labour still remained.


C. EXTRACTS FROM MODERN BOOKS.

(1) =Hume=, Essay XI, _Of the populousness of antient nations_.

We must now consider what disadvantages the antients lay under with
regard to populousness, and what checks they received from their
political maxims and institutions. There are commonly compensations
in every human condition; and tho’ these compensations be not always
perfectly equal, yet they serve, at least, to restrain the prevailing
principle. To compare them and estimate their influence, is indeed
very difficult, even where they take place in the same age, and in
neighbouring countries: But where several ages have intervened, and only
scattered lights are afforded us by antient authors; what can we do but
amuse ourselves by talking, _pro_ and _con_, on an interesting subject,
and thereby correcting all hasty and violent determinations?

MODERN ITALIAN CONDITIONS.

(2) =Bolton King and Thomas Okey=, _Italy today_.

In _Italy today_, Messrs =Bolton King and Thomas Okey= furnish a most
interesting collection of facts relative to Italian rural conditions.
The extent to which the phenomena of antiquity reappear in the details
of this careful treatise is most striking. Italy being the central land
of my inquiry, and convinced as I am that the great variety of local
conditions is even now not sufficiently recognized in Roman Histories,
this excellent book is of peculiar value. In the course of (say) fifteen
centuries Italy and her people have passed through strange vicissitudes,
not merely political: a great change has taken place in the range of
agricultural products: yet old phenomena of rural life meet the inquirer
at every turn. Surely this cannot be dismissed lightly as a casual
coincidence. I cannot find room to set out the resemblances in detail,
so I append a short table of reference to passages in the book that have
impressed me most. Supplementary to this, as a vivid illustration of
conditions in a mountain district, the first three chapters of _In the
Abruzzi_, by =Anne Macdonell=, are decidedly helpful. For instance, it
appears that the old migratory pasturage still existed in full force down
to quite recent times, but the late conversion of much Apulian lowland
from pasture to tillage has seriously affected the position of the
highland shepherds by reducing the area available for winter grazing. The
chapter on brigandage has also some instructive passages.

REFERENCES TO _Italy today_.

Peasant contrasted with wage-earner, pp 64-6, 72, 74, 126, 166-8,
171-2, 175-6, 200, 312, and Index under _mezzaiuoli_ and _peasants_.
Agricultural classes, pp 164-6. Partiaries, pp 168, 173. Emphyteusis, p
173. Improvements, p 173. Farming through steward, pp 174-5. Tenancies,
pp 168-74, and Index under _peasants_. Rents in kind, p 171. Debt of
various classes, pp 182-4, 366, 376. Taxes, p 140. Gangs of labourers, pp
166, 376. Wages, pp 126, 128, 168, 174, 366, 369-71. Food in wage, p 370.
Emigration, pp 371, 396. Self-help in rural districts, pp 184-6, 376.
Charities, pp 220 foll, 379 foll. Socialists and Peasantry, pp 64-6, 170,
172, cf 71-2.

(3) =R E Prothero=, _The pleasant land of France_. London 1908.

Chapters (essays) II and III, _French farming_ and _Tenant-right and
agrarian outrage in France_, contain much of interest.

pp 91-2 Social advantages of the system of peasant proprietors. A
training[1829] to the rural population. Element of stability. The answer
to agitators ‘Cela est bien, mais il faut cultiver notre jardin.’
Difficulties which beset its artificial creation. _Métayage_ (under
present conditions) has proved the best shelter for tenant-farmers
against the agricultural storm. Need of implicit confidence between
landlord and working partner.

pp 98-9 Tenant-right in Santerre (Picardy). Tenant considers himself
a co-proprietor of the land. Former payment of rent in kind taken to
be a sign of joint ownership. Now in money, but calculated upon market
price of corn. Landlord’s loss of control. High money value of _droit de
marché_.

p 104 Traces of Roman occupation. Roman soldier followed by farmer.
‘Under the empire the _colonus_ was not a slave, but the owner of
slaves: he held his land in perpetuity; he could not leave it. He paid
a fixed rent in kind, which could not be raised. Tenant-right therefore
is explained as the recognition by the Frankish conquerors of this
hereditary claim to the perpetual occupation of the soil.’ [One of the
various explanations offered.]

p 119 Severe legislation failed to get rid of tenant-right, but since
1791 it has been recognized, and so its importance decreased. Under the
_ancien régime_ leases were short—9 years—and precarious. They were
governed by the Roman law maxim _emptori fundi necesse non est stare
colonum_. That is, if property changed hands during the continuance
of the lease, the new owner might evict the tenant. The _Code Civil_
confirms law of 1791—dispossession only if provision has been made (in
lease) for it.

In general, land-tenures vary very greatly in the various provinces.

(4) =G G Coulton=, _Social life in Britain from the Conquest to the
Reformation_. Cambridge 1918.

In Section VI _Manor and Cottage_ are a number of extracts throwing light
on the rustic conditions of their times.

    1. _A model Manor_ pp 301-6, describing the organization
    of an estate, with the duties of the several officials and
    departmental servants. Watchful diligence and economy, strict
    accountability and honesty are insisted on, that the rights of
    the Lord may not be impaired.

    2. _The Manorial court_, pp 306-8.

    3. _The peasant’s fare_, p 308.

    4. _Incidents of the countryside_, p 309.

    7. _Decay of yeomanry_, pp 310-12. (Latimer.)

    8. _Decay of husbandry_, pp 312-14. (Sir T More.)

All these passages are of great interest as shewing how a number of
phenomena observable in the case of ancient estates are repeated under
medieval conditions. The typical Manor with its elaborate hierarchy
and rules, the struggles of the small yeoman, the encroachments of big
landlords, the special difficulties of small-scale tillage caused by
growth of large-scale pasturage, the increase of wastrels and sturdy
beggars, are all notable points, worthy the attention of a student of
ancient farm life and labour.

THE BIG MAN AND THE SMALL FARMER.

(5) =Clifton Johnson=, _From the St Lawrence to Virginia_. New York 1913,
p 21. Chapter on the Adirondack winter.

(_Conversation in an up-country store._)

‘I worked for Rockefeller most of that season. You know he has a big
estate down below here a ways. There used to be farmhouses—yes and
villages on it, but he bought the owners all out, or froze ’em out. One
feller was determined not to sell, and as a sample of how things was made
uncomfortable for him I heard tell that two men came to his house once
and made him a present of some venison. They had hardly gone when the
game warden dropped in and arrested him for havin’ venison in his house.
All such tricks was worked on him, and he spent every cent he was worth
fighting lawsuits. People wa’n’t allowed to fish on the property, and the
women wa’n’t allowed to pick berries on it. A good deal of hard feeling
was stirred up, and Rockefeller would scoot from the train to his house,
and pull the curtains down, ’fraid they’d shoot him. Oh! he was awful
scairt.’

EASTERN EUROPE.

(6) =Marion L Newbigin DSc=, _Geographical aspects of Balkan problems_.
London 1915.

_Turks_—‘not all their virtues, not all their military strength, have
saved them from the slow sapping of vitality due to their divorce alike
from the actual tilling of the land and from trade and commerce.... He
has been within the (Balkan) peninsula a parasite, chiefly upon the
ploughing peasant, and the effect has been to implant in the mind of that
peasant a passion for agriculture, for the undisturbed possession of a
patch of freehold, which is probably as strong here as it has ever been
in the world.’ p 137.

_Thessaly_—‘the landowners are almost always absentees, appearing only
at the time of harvest’ (originally Turks, now mostly Greeks) ‘who have
taken little personal interest in the land’ (no great improvement in
condition of cultivator). (So in Bosnia—better in Serbia and Bulgaria)
‘lands mostly worked by the peasants on the half-shares system.’ p 175.

_Albania_—(poverty extreme—temporary emigration of the males, frequent in
poor regions) ‘young Albˢ often leave their country during the winter,
going to work in Greece or elsewhere as field labourers, and returning to
their mountains in the spring.’ pp 183-4.

Generally—small holdings mostly in the Balkan states.


D. LIST OF SOME BOOKS USED.

This list does not pretend to be complete. Many other works are referred
to here and there in the notes on the text. But I feel bound to mention
the names of some, particularly those dealing with conditions that did
or still do exist in the modern world. Miscellaneous reading of this
kind has been to me a great help in the endeavour to understand the full
bearing of ancient evidence, and (I hope) to judge it fairly. It is on
the presentation and criticism of that evidence that I depend: for the
great handbooks of Antiquities do not help me much. The practice of
making a statement and giving in support of it a reference or references
is on the face of it sound. But, when the witnesses cited are authors
writing under widely various conditions of time and place and personal
circumstances, it is necessary whenever possible to appraise each one
separately. And when the aim is, not to write a technical treatise on
‘scientific’ lines, but to describe what is a highly important background
of a great civilization, a separate treatment of witnesses needs no
apology. I cannot cite in detail the references to conditions in a number
of countries, for instance India and China, but I have given them by page
or chapter so as to be consulted with ease.

(1) AGRICULTURE AND RUSTIC LIFE AND LABOUR.

    M Weber, _Die Römische Agrargeschichte_, Stuttgart 1891.

    C Daubeny, _Lectures on Roman husbandry_, Oxford 1857.

    Ll Storr-Best, _Varro on farming_, translated with Introduction
    commentary and excursus, London 1912.

    E de Laveleye, _Primitive Property_, English translation 1878.

    H Blümner, article ‘Landwirtschaft’ in I Müller’s _Handbuch_ VI
    ii 2, ed 3 pp 533 foll.

    A E Zimmern, _The Greek Commonwealth_, Oxford 1911.

    Büchsenschütz, _Besitz und Erwerb_, Halle 1869.

    _Columella of Husbandry_, translation (anonymous), London 1745.

(2) ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL MATTERS.

    Adam Smith, _Wealth of Nations_, _passim_.

    H Nissen, _Italische Landeskunde_, Berlin 1883-1902.

    K W Nitzsch, _Geschichte der Römischen Republik_, vol II,
    Leipzig 1885.

    L Bloch, _Soziale Kämpfe im alten Röm_, ed III Berlin 1913.

    David Hume, _Essays_, ed 1760 (Essay XI of the populousness of
    antient nations).

    J Beloch, _Die Bevölkerung der Griechisch-Römischen Welt_,
    Leipzig 1886.

    H Francotte, _L’Industrie dans la Grèce ancienne_, Bruxelles
    1900-1.

    O Seeck, _Geschichte des Untergangs der antiken Welt_, Berlin
    1897-1913.

    O Seeck, ‘Die Schatzungsordnung Diocletians,’ in _Zeitschrift
    für Social- und Wirthschaftsgeschichte_, Weimar 1896.

    H Schiller, _Geschichte der Römischen Kaiserzeit_, Gotha 1883-7.

    S Dill, _Roman society in the last century of the Western
    Empire_, London 1898.

    G Gilbert, _Handbuch der Griechischen Staatsalterthümer_, vol
    II, Leipzig 1885.

(3) LAW AND THE LATER COLONATE.

Several of the books named under other heads deal with legal points, for
instance Beauchet, Lipsius, Meier and Schömann, Calderini, M Clerc.

The Digest and Codex Justinianus have been used in the text of Mommsen
and P Krüger.

    _The Codex Theodosianus_ in text of Mommsen and P M Meyer,
    Berlin 1905 and in Ritter’s edition of Godefroi, Leipzig
    1736-45.

    P Girard, _Textes de droit Romain_, ed 4 Paris 1913.

    F Zulueta, ‘De Patrociniis vicorum,’ in Vinogradoff’s _Oxford
    Studies_, Oxford 1909.

    M Rostowzew, _Studien zur Geschichte des Römischen Colonates_,
    Leipzig and Berlin 1910.

    B Heisterbergk, _Die Entstehung des Colonats_, Leipzig 1876.

    A Esmein, _Mélanges d’histoire du Droit_, Paris 1886.

    Fustel de Coulanges, ‘Le Colonat Romain,’ in his _Recherches
    sur quelques problèmes d’histoire_, Paris 1885.

    H F Pelham, _Essays_ (No XIII), Oxford 1911.

I am sorry that inability to procure copies has prevented me from
consulting the following works:

    Beaudouin, _Les grands domaines dans l’empire Romain_, Paris
    1899.

    Bolkestein, _de colonatu Romano eiusque origine_, Amsterdam
    1906.

(4) MANUMISSION AND KINDRED TOPICS.

    A Calderini, _La manomissione e la condizione dei liberti in
    Grecia_, Milan 1908.

    M Clerc, _Les métèques Athéniens_, Paris 1893.

    L Beauchet, _Droit privé de la République Athénienne_, Paris
    1897.

    J H Lipsius, _Das Attische Recht etc._, Leipzig 1905.

    Meier und Schömann, _Der Attische Process_, Berlin 1883-7.

    Mommsen, _Römisches Staatsrecht_.

    G Haenel, _Corpus legum_, Leipzig 1857.

    C G Bruns, _Fontes Iuris Romani antiqui_.

    Dareste, Haussoullier, Th Reinach, _Recueil des inscriptions
    juridiques Grecques_, Paris 1904. (Laws of Gortyn.)

    Wescher et Foucart, _Inscriptions de Delphes_, Paris 1863.

    Wilamowitz-Möllendorf, ‘Demotika der Metöken,’ in _Hermes_ 1887.

(5) SLAVERY AND SLAVE TRADE.

    H Wallon, _Histoire de l’esclavage dans l’antiquité_, ed 2
    Paris 1879.

    J K Ingram, _A history of slavery and serfdom_, London 1895.

    E H Minns, _Scythians and Greeks_, Cambridge 1913 (pages 438,
    440, 461, 465, 471, 567).

    V A Smith, _The early history of India_, Oxford 1914 (pages
    100-1, 177-8, 441).

    M S Evans, _Black and White in the Southern States_, London
    1915.

    ” _Black and White in South-east Africa_, ed 2 London 1916.

    J E Cairnes, _The Slave Power_, ed 2 London and Cambridge 1863.

    W W Buckland, _The Roman Law of Slavery_, Cambridge 1908.

    W E Hardenburg, _The Putumayo, the Devil’s Paradise_, with
    extracts from Sir R Casement’s report, London and Leipzig 1912.

    H W Nevinson, _A modern Slavery_, London and New York 1906.

    Sidney Low, _Egypt in transition_ (see under _Medieval and
    Modern conditions_).

    Mrs M A Handley, _Roughing it in Southern India_, London 1911
    (pages 193-4).

(6) MEDIEVAL AND MODERN CONDITIONS.

_Books illustrating matters of rustic life, peasant proprietorship,
agricultural wage-labour, etc._

    Bolton King and Thomas Okey, _Italy today_, new ed London 1909.

    R E Prothero, _The pleasant land of France_, London 1908
    (Essays II and III).

    Anne Macdonell, _In the Abruzzi_, London 1908 (chapters 1-3).

    G Renwick, _Finland today_, London 1911 (pages 59, 60).

    Sir J D Rees, _The real India_, London 1908.

    Marion L Newbigin, _Geographical aspects of Balkan problems_,
    London 1915.

    Ralph Butler, _The new eastern Europe_, London 1919 (chapter
    VII).

    John Spargo, _Bolshevism, the enemy of political and industrial
    democracy_, London 1919 (pages 69, 156, 275, 278).

    W H Dawson, _The evolution of modern Germany_, London 1908
    (chapters XIII, XIV).

    P Vinogradoff, _The growth of the Manor_, ed 2 London 1911.

    G G Coulton, _Social life in Britain from the Conquest to the
    Reformation_, Cambridge 1918 (Section VI).

    Mary Bateson, _Medieval England_ 1066-1350, London 1903.

    Sidney Low, _Egypt in transition_, London 1914 (pages 60-2,
    240-1).

    Sidney Low, _A vision of India_, ed 2 London 1907 (chapter
    XXIII).

    Sir A Fraser, _Among Indian Rajahs and Ryots_, ed 3 London 1912
    (pages 185, 191-210).

    J Macgowan, _Men and Manners in modern China_, London 1912
    (pages 17 foll, 189-96, 275-7).

    M Augé-Laribé, _L’évolution de la France agricole_, Paris 1912.

(7) SPECIAL AMERICAN SECTION.

    H Baerlein, _Mexico, the land of unrest_, London 1914 (chapters
    VIII, XI).

    F L Olmsted, _A journey in the seaboard slave States_ (1853-4),
    ed 2 New York 1904 (pages 240, 282, vol II pages 155, 198, 237).

    H R Helper, _The impending crisis of the South (economic)_, New
    York 1857.

    B B Munford, _Virginia’s attitude towards Slavery and
    Secession_, ed 2 London 1910 (pages 133-4 etc).

    W Archer, _Through Afro-America, an English reading of the
    Race-problem_, London 1910.

    A H Stone, _Studies in the American Race-problem_, London 1908
    printed in New York.

    F F Browne, _The everyday life of Abraham Lincoln_, London 1914
    (pages 348-9).

    G P Fisher, _The colonial era in America_, London 1892 (pages
    254, 259).

    J Rodway, _Guiana_, London 1912 (of Indians, pages 224-5).

    J Creelman, _Diaz, Master of Mexico_, New York 1911 (pages
    401-5).

    E R Turner, _The Negro in Pennsylvania 1639-1861_, Washington
    1911.

    _Social and economic forces in American history_, New York and
    London 1913 (by several authors).

    J F Rhodes, _History of the United States from 1850_, London
    1893-1906.

    C R Enock, _The Republics of Central and South America_, London
    and New York 1913.




FOOTNOTES


[1] A good specimen of such work at a late date may be found in Statius
_Silvae_ IV 3 on the _via Domitiana_ lines 40-66.

[2] For instance Diodorus V 38 § 1, Strabo XII 3 § 40 (p 562), Apuleius
_met_ IX 12.

[3] Not artistic, of course.

[4] See especially Ed Meyer _Kleine Schriften_ pp 80-212.

[5] To this question I return in the concluding chapter.

[6] A good instance is Xen _anab_ IV 1 §§ 12-14.

[7] Veget I 3.

[8] Ἀθηναίων πολιτεία cap 16, with Sandys’ notes.

[9] _Catil 4 § 1 non fuit consilium ... neque vero agrum colundo aut
venando servilibus officiis intentum aetatem agere._

[10] To this topic I return in the concluding chapter. See chapter on
Aristotle.

[11] See chapter on Cato.

[12] For the existence of this system in Modern Italy see Bolton King and
Okey _Italy today_ pp 174-5.

[13] Cic _in Catil_ II § 18. See the chapter on Cicero.

[14] Cf Valerius Maximus VII 5 § 2.

[15] For modern Italy see Appendix.

[16] Cf Caesar _B C_ I 34, 56, discussed in the chapter on Varro.

[17] _Oratio_ XV (1 pp 266-7 Dind).

[18] VI 315, XXIII 712, VII 221.

[19] XII 433-5, XXI 445, 451, X 304.

[20] XXI 444.

[21] XVIII 550.

[22] II 751.

[23] XVIII 542, 554, XI 67, XX 495-7, V 500, XIII 590.

[24] XXI 257-9.

[25] XI 68.

[26] XVIII 550-60.

[27] XXI 281-3.

[28] XXI 40-2, 78-80, 101-3, 453-4, XXII 45, XXIV 751-2.

[29] XVI 835-6, VI 463.

[30] VI 455, XVI 831, XX 193.

[31] XII 421-4.

[32] IV 245, XIV 3-4, 62-5, XVI 302-3, XVII 533. (_Iliad_ V 413, VI 366.)

[33] Selling XIV 297, XV 387, 428, 452-3, XX 382-3. Buying I 430, XIV
115, etc.

[34] XIX 488-90, XXII 173-7, 189-93, 440-5, 462-4, 465-77. (Cf XVIII
82-7.)

[35] IV 245 foll.

[36] IX 205-7, XI 430-2, XVI 14 foll, XIX 489, XXIII 227-8, etc.

[37] XIV 449-52.

[38] VII 224-5, XIX 526.

[39] IV 643-4, 652.

[40] In XIX 56-7 a τέκτων, Icmalius, is even mentioned by name.

[41] XVII 382-7, XIX 134-5.

[42] XIV 56-8.

[43] XVII 578.

[44] XVII 18-9, 226-8.

[45] XVIII 403.

[46] VII 112 foll, VIII 557-63.

[47] IX 109-11, 125 foll.

[48] XV 319 foll.

[49] XVIII 1-116.

[50] IX 191.

[51] II 22, IV 318, XIV 344, XVI 139-45.

[52] XIV 222-3.

[53] XIII 31-4.

[54] XVIII 357-64.

[55] XI 489-91.

[56] IV 644.

[57] IV 735-7.

[58] XXIV 208-10.

[59] XXIV 222-55.

[60] XXIV 257.

[61] XV 412-92.

[62] XIV 271-2.

[63] XXI 213-6.

[64] XV 363-5.

[65] XIV 62-5.

[66] XVIII 366-75.

[67] 299-302, 394-5, 399-400, 403-4, 646-7.

[68] 289-90, 303-5, 308-13, 381-2, 410-3 (cf 498).

[69] 20-4.

[70] 37-41.

[71] 298-9, 397-8.

[72] 289-90.

[73] 303-5.

[74] 308-13.

[75] 410-3, 500-1, 554 foll, 576 foll.

[76] 391.

[77] 25-6.

[78] 493, 538, 544, 809.

[79] 686.

[80] 717-8.

[81] 394-400.

[82] 327-34.

[83] 341.

[84] 605.

[85] 602-3.

[86] 370.

[87] 459, 469-71, 502-3, 559-60, 573, 597-8, 607-8, 765-7.

[88] 406 is reasonably suspected.

[89] 405, 779, 800.

[90] 695-705.

[91] 32, 597, 606-7.

[92] _Solon the Athenian_, by Ivan M. Linforth of the University of
California (1919) discusses in full the conditions of Solon’s time and
his actual policy, with an edition of his poetic remains.

[93] The view of M Clerc _Les métèques Athéniens_ pp 340-5.

[94] ἄλλος γῆν τέμνων πολυδένδρεον εἰς ἐνιαυτὸν λατρεύει τοῖσιν καμπύλ’
ἄροτρα μέλει. Mr Linforth takes the last four words as defining ἄλλος,
the plowman. I think they refer to the employers, spoken of as a class.

[95] Aristotle Ἀθ πολ 11, 12, 16.

[96] See the remarks of Dareste Haussoullier and Th Reinach in the
_Recueil des inscriptions juridiques Grecques_ (Paris 1904) on the Gortyn
Laws.

[97] See Livy X 4 § 9.

[98] See his references to the Spartan use of ξείνοι = βάρβαροι IX 11,
53, 55.

[99] VIII 68 γ.

[100] VIII 26, 105-6.

[101] II 164-7.

[102] Isocrates _Busiris_ §§ 15-20 pp 224-5 also allows for no special
class of γεωργοὶ in Egypt.

[103] Plato _Timaeus_ p 24. Diodorus I 28, 73-4 (? from Hecataeus of
Abdera, latter half of 3rd cent BC).

[104] II 141, 168. See Index under _Egypt_.

[105] The passage of Isocrates just cited seems to favour this view.

[106] VIII 137.

[107] VIII 26.

[108] VIII 51.

[109] VII 102.

[110] VI 137.

[111] IV 72.

[112] VIII 142.

[113] οἰκετέων here = members of the family, as often. Stein refers to
VIII 4, 41, 44, 106. Compare the use of οἰκεὺς in the Iliad, and see
Aesch _Agam_ 733, Eur _Suppl_ 870.

[114] _Pers_ 186-7, 255, 337, 391, 423, 434, 475, 798, 844.

[115] _Eum_ 186-90.

[116] _Prom_ 454-8, 708.

[117] Fragm 194, 198, Dind.

[118] _Suppl_ 612-4, _Eum_ 890-1.

[119] _Trach_ 52-3, 61-3, _O T_ 763-4, Fragm 518, 677, Dind.

[120] _Antig_ 338-40. The use of horses for ploughing is strange. Jebb
thinks that mules are meant.

[121] _O T_ 1029.

[122] _Trach_ 31-3.

[123] _Electra_ 37-8, 375-6, _Phoenissae_ 405, fragm 143 and many more.

[124] The loyalty of slaves to kind masters is referred to very often.

[125] References in Euripides are too many to cite here.

[126] Cf the oft-quoted line from Eur Auge ἡ φύσις ἐβούλεθ’, ᾗ νόμων
oὐδὲν μέλει.

[127] Cf Eur fragm 515, 828, Dind, etc.

[128] Cf Eur fragm 263, 1035, Dind, and the use of τὸ δοῦλον ‘the
slave-quality’ in _Hecuba_ 332-3, _Ion_ 983, etc.

[129] See Cope’s note on Aristotle _rhet_ 1 13 § 2.

[130] _Herc Fur_ 1341-6.

[131] _Alcestis_ 2, 6. _Electra_ 203-4. _Cyclops_ 76 foll, cf 23-4.

[132] _Electra_ 252.

[133] _Electra_ 35-9.

[134] _ibid_ 73-4.

[135] _ibid_ 75-6.

[136] _ibid_ 78-81.

[137] The slaves in 360 and 394 are attendants of Orestes.

[138] _Suppl_ 420-2.

[139] _Orest_ 918-20. Cf fragm 188 Dind where the virtue of rustic life
is sketched καὶ δόξεις φρονεῖν σκάπτων ἀρῶν γῆν ποιμνίοις ἐπιστατῶν.

[140] _Rhesus_ 74-5.

[141] _Rhesus_ 176.

[142] _Heracl_ 639, 788-9, 890, cf fragm 827 Dind.

[143] _Die pseudoxenophontische Ἀθηναίων πολιτεία ... von Ernst Kalinka_
(Teubner 1913). A great work.

[144] 1 § 3.

[145] 1 § 5 etc.

[146] This view reappears later in Isocrates.

[147] In his book _The Greek Commonwealth_.

[148] 1 §§ 10-12.

[149] Kalinka well points out that in 1 § 11 ἐλευθέρους ἀφιέναι is not
technical = manumit.

[150] In 1 § 17 it is notable that among those who gain by concentration
of business at Athens is εἴ τῳ ζεῦγός ἐστιν ἢ ἀνδράποδον μισθοφοροῦν.
Country carts would now be plentiful in Athens.

[151] 1 § 19.

[152] 2 § 14.

[153] _Equites_ 792-4, _Pax_ 632-6, _Eccl_ 243.

[154] _Eccl_ 197-8.

[155] _Eccl_ 591-2.

[156] _Plut_ 510-626.

[157] Old Strepsiades still has his thoughts fixed on these, _Nubes_
202-3.

[158] _Plut_ 903.

[159] _Plut_ 223-4.

[160] _Ach_ 180, 211, _Pax_ 570, 1185-6, _Eq_ 316-7, _Nub_ 43 foll.

[161] The gradual conversion is seen in _Ach_ 557 foll, 626 foll.

[162] _Ach_ 32-4.

[163] _Pax_ 551-70, 1127 foll; cf fragm 100, 107, 109, 294, 387, Kock.

[164] _Pax_ 509-11.

[165] _Pax_ 190.

[166] _Pax_ 551-70, 1318-24.

[167] _Lysistr_ 1173-4.

[168] _Ach_ 248-50, 259.

[169] _Ach_ 266.

[170] _Nub_ 43 foll, 138.

[171] _Vesp_ 442-52.

[172] _Pax_ 1140 foll.

[173] _Pax_ 1248-9.

[174] _Lys_ 1203-14.

[175] _Eccl_ 651.

[176] _Plut_ 26-7, 253.

[177] _Plut_ 517-20, 525-6.

[178] _Plut_ 510-626.

[179] _Aves_ 1152.

[180] _Aves_ 1431-2 (cf Vesp 959), fragm of Δαιταλεῖς 4 Dind, 221 Kock.

[181] _Vesp_ 712.

[182] _Ran_ 164-77.

[183] _Eccl_ 197-8, 591-2.

[184] _Nub_ 71-2. Cf φελλέα in Isaeus VIII § 42 p 73.

[185] _Pax_ 552, 1318.

[186] _Ach_ 1018-36.

[187] _Eccl_ 605, _Av_ 712.

[188] _Thucydides and the history of his age_ chapters III-VII.

[189] See Francotte _L’industrie dans la Grèce ancienne_ livre II cc 5-7.

[190] _Thucydides mythistoricus_ chapter II.

[191] II 14, 16. An earlier period is referred to in I 126 §§ 7, 8.

[192] II 65 § 2.

[193] I 141.

[194] _Die Bevölkerung der Griechisch-Röm. Welt_ p 150.

[195] I 143.

[196] Theopompus in Athenaeus 149 d.

[197] I 139 § 2.

[198] VI 91 § 7.

[199] VII 27 § 5.

[200] Trygaeus in Aristoph _Pax_ is a farmer from this district.

[201] III 73, VIII 40 § 2.

[202] III 88 § 3.

[203] II 62 § 3.

[204] _opus cit_ chapters IV, VII.

[205] For instance, in Euboea and Aegina.

[206] III 50. Herodes, whose murder was later the occasion of a speech of
Antiphon, is thought to have been one of the cleruchs.

[207] Arnold’s note explains the situation well, and Beloch p 83 agrees.

[208] See the inscription relative to Brea, G F Hill _Sources_ III 317.

[209] See the hint in the speech of Pericles I 143 § 4.

[210] That there was normally much insecurity in rustic life in some
parts of Greece, may be inferred from the dance-scene of the farmer and
the robber, acted by men from north central Greece in _Anabasis_ VI 1 §§
7, 8. Daubeny’s Lectures pp 17, 18.

[211] _Hellenica_ II 1 § 1.

[212] _Hellenica_ VI 2 § 37.

[213] Ar _Pol_ VII 6 § 8.

[214] _Anab_ III 2 § 26.

[215] _Anab_ VI 4 § 8.

[216] _Anab_ I 2 § 27, V 6 § 13, VII 3 § 48, 8 §§ 12-19.

[217] _Anab_ IV 1 §§ 12, 13.

[218] _Anab_ V 3 § 4.

[219] _Anab_ IV 8 § 4. It does not appear that the man rejoined his
native tribe.

[220] _Anab_ VII 7 § 53.

[221] See the protest of Callicratidas, _Hellen_ I 6 § 14, with
Breitenbach’s note.

[222] _Anab_ VII 1 § 36, 2 § 6, 3 § 3.

[223] _Memorab_ II 7.

[224] _Memor_ I 2 § 57, II 7 §§ 4-11, 8.

[225] _Memor_ III 13 § 4.

[226] _Memor_ I 1 § 16, IV 2 §§ 22-31.

[227] _Memor_ I 5 § 2.

[228] _Memor_ III 7 § 6, 9 §§ 11, 15.

[229] _Econ_ 20 §§ 22 foll.

[230] _Econ_ 12 § 3.

[231] _Econ_ 3 §§ 1-5, 5 §§ 15, 16, 12 § 19.

[232] _Econ_ 7-9, 12-14, 21.

[233] _Econ_ 13 § 9, cf 9 § 5.

[234] _Econ_ 12-15.

[235] _Econ_ 14 § 8.

[236] _Econ_ 14 § 9.

[237] _Econ_ 5 § 4, 14 § 2, 20 _passim_.

[238] _Econ_ 5 § 6.

[239] _Econ_ 1 § 4, 4 § 6.

[240] cf _Memor_ II 7 §§ 7-10.

[241] _Econ_ 11 §§ 9, 10.

[242] _Econ_ 20 _passim_.

[243] _Econ_ 21 § 10.

[244] _Econ_ 21 § 12.

[245] _Econ_ 21 § 9.

[246] _Memor_ II 8 especially § 3. For this suggestion that a free man
should be steward of a rich man’s estate I can find no parallel. See the
chapters on the Roman agricultural writers. The case of the shepherd in
Juvenal I 107-8 is not parallel.

[247] _Memor_ II 5 § 2. See _Vect_ 4 § 22 for suggested employment of
free citizens or aliens.

[248] _Vectigalia_ ch 4 _passim_.

[249] _Cyrop_ VII 5 § 67, VIII 3 §§ 36-41.

[250] _Cyrop_ IV 4 §§ 5-12, VII 5 §§ 36, 73.

[251] _Cyrop_ VIII 1 §§ 43-4.

[252] Cited from Kock’s edition 1880-8.

[253] _Menandrea_, ed Körte 1910, Teubner.

[254] Fragments 100-24. From other plays, 294, 387.

[255] Cratinus 81, Pherecrates 212.

[256] e.g. Antiphanes 265, Philemon 227, Menander 581, etc.

[257] Philemon 95.

[258] Philemon 213, Menander 68, 716, Hipparchus 2.

[259] Menander 14, Posidippus 23 with Kock’s note.

[260] Pherecrates 10, Crates 14.

[261] Nicophon 13, 14.

[262] Athenaeus VI pp 263, 267 _e_-270 _a_.

[263] Menandrea pp 159-61 (fragments of Γεωργός).

[264] Menandrea pp 157, 159.

[265] _opus cit_ and Menander 97 Kock. For ἄγροικος connoting simplicity
cf 794 ἄγροικος εἶναι προσποιεῖ πονηρὸς ὤν.

[266] Menandrea p 155, 96 Kock.

[267] Menandrea p 15 (lines 26, 40).

[268] Menandrea p 13 (line 12, cf 111).

[269] Menandrea p 5.

[270] Menandrea p 25.

[271] Kock III p 473 (adespota 347).

[272] Lucian, Timon 7, 8. Kock adesp 1434, note.

[273] Menander 795.

[274] Menander 642.

[275] Menander 408.

[276] Menander 63, τὰ κακῶς τρέφοντα χωρί’ ἀνδρείους ποιεῖ.

[277] Stobaeus _flor_ LVI 16 preserves an utterance of Socrates on
labour, especially agricultural labour, as the basis of wellbeing, in
which he remarks that ἐν τῇ γεωργίᾳ πάντα ἔνεστιν ὦν χρείαν ἔχομεν.

[278] ἰδιωτῶν Aristotle _Pol_ II 7 § 1.

[279] Arist _Pol_ II 6 § 13, 12 § 10.

[280] Arist _Pol_ II 7 § 6 and Newman’s note.

[281] Arist _Pol_ II 7, 8.

[282] In _Thucydides and the history of his age_ chapters III-VII.

[283] _Politics_ III 13 § 2.

[284] See Newman on Ar _Pol_ II 7 § 7.

[285] Ar _Pol_ II 6 § 13.

[286] Ar _Pol_ II 12 § 10.

[287] Ar _Pol_ II 7 §§ 3-7.

[288] _Pol_ II 7 _passim_.

[289] _Pol_ II 7 §§ 14, 15.

[290] μυρίανδρον _Pol_ II 8 §§ 2, 3, with notes in Newman.

[291] ‘Artisan’ is not quite = τεχνίτης. All professional work is
included.

[292] _Pol_ II 7 §§ 8, 9. The probable influence of Spartan precedents is
pointed out in Mr Newman’s note.

[293] See the valuable discussion in Grundy _op cit_ chapter VIII.

[294] Cf Isocr _de pace_ § 69 p 173, §§ 129-131 p 185.

[295] Plato was evidently uneasy at the growing influence of metics, to
judge from the jealous rule of _Laws_ p 850. This is in striking contrast
with the view of Xenophon.

[296] _Laws_ 630 _b_, cf 697 _e_.

[297] See _Republic_ 565 _a_ on the indifference of the handworking
δῆμος. Cf Isocr _de pace_ § 52 p 170.

[298] Cf Xenophon _hell_ VII 5 § 27 on the ἀκρισία καὶ ταραχὴ intensified
after Mantinea, 362 BC.

[299] Even Isocrates, who hated Sparta, says of it τὴν μάλιστα τὰ παλαιὰ
διασώζουσαν, _Helen_ § 63 ρ 218, and attributes the merits of the Spartan
government to imitation of Egypt, _Busiris_ § 17 p 225. He notes the
moral change in Sparta, _de pace_ §§ 95 foll pp 178-180.

[300] _Republic_ p 421 _e_, _Laws_ 936 _c_, 744 _e_.

[301] _Laws_ 736 _c_, cf _Rep_ 565 _a_, _b_.

[302] _Republic_ 421 _d_.

[303] _Republ_ 416 _d_, _e_, 417, 464 _c_, 543 _b_.

[304] _Republ_ 540 _e_-541 _a_.

[305] _Republ_ 469-471.

[306] _Republ_ 495 _d_, 590 _c_, 522 _b_. _Laws_ 741.

[307] _Republ_ 374 _c_, _d_.

[308] _Republ_ 433-4.

[309] _Republ_ 468 _a_.

[310] That the speculations of Greek political writers were influenced by
the traditions of a primitive communism is the view of Emil de Laveleye
_Primitive property_ ch 10.

[311] _Republ_ 463 _b_.

[312] _Republ_ 369 _b_-373 _c_.

[313] Cf Isocrates _Panath_ § 180 p 271.

[314] _Republ_ 547 _b_ foll.

[315] _Republ_ 550-2.

[316] _Laws_ 756. See _Rep_ 565 _a_ with Adam’s note.

[317] _Laws_ 754.

[318] See _Politicus_ 293-7, Grote’s _Plato_ III pp 309-10.

[319] _Laws_ 737 foll, 922 _a_-924 _a_, called γεωμόροι 919 _d_.

[320] _Laws_ 744 _d_, _e_.

[321] _Laws_ 745 _c_-_e_.

[322] _Laws_ 842 _c_-_e_.

[323] _Laws_ 742.

[324] _Laws_ 705.

[325] Rustic slaves, _Laws_ 760 _e_, 763 _a_.

[326] _Laws_ 832 _d_. The artisans are not citizens, 846 _d_-847 _b_.

[327] _Laws_ 806 _d_.

[328] _Laws_ 777 _c_.

[329] _Laws_ 777 _d_-778 _a_, cf 793 _e_.

[330] _Laws_ 838 _d_.

[331] _Laws_ 865 _c_, _d_, cf 936 _c_-_e_.

[332] _Laws_ 720. See _Rep_ 406 on medical treatment of δημιουργοί.

[333] Case of domestics, _Republ_ 578-9.

[334] _Laws_ 776-7.

[335] _Laws_ 690 _b_.

[336] _Politicus_ 262 _d_.

[337] _Politicus_ 289-90, _Republ_ 371, _Laws_ 742 _a_.

[338] _Republ_ 467 _a_, _Laws_ 720 _a_, _b_.

[339] _Laws_ 762 _e_.

[340] _Laws_ 823.

[341] _Republ_ 344 _b_.

[342] _Republ_ 435 _e_-436 _a_, _Laws_ 747 _c_.

[343] _Rep_ 423 _b_, 452 _c_, 544 _d_, _Laws_ 840 _e_.

[344] _Laws_ 886 _a_, 887 _e_.

[345] It is not easy to reach a firm opinion on this matter. The
inscribed records are nearly all of a much later age. But even a more
informal method of manumission would surely, if common, have left more
clearly marked traces in literature. See Index, _Manumission_.

[346] The problem of the worn-out plantation slave was much discussed
in the United States in slavery days. An interesting account of the
difficulties arising from emancipation in British Guiana is given in J
Rodway’s _Guiana_ (1912) pp 114 foll.

[347] _Laws_ 914-5, and an allusion in _Republ_ 495 _e_.

[348] _Laws_ 914 _a_, 932 _d_.

[349] See Lysias XXII, speech against the corn-dealers.

[350] See for instance Andocides _de reditu_ §§ 20-1 p 22 (Cyprus),
Isocrates _Trapeziticus_ § 57 p 370 (Bosporus).

[351] Isocr _de bigis_ § 13 p 349.

[352] Isocr _Panegyricus_ § 28 p 46, cf Plato _Menex_ 237 _e_.

[353] Andoc _de myster_ §§ 92-3 p 12, Böckh-Fränkel _Staatsh_ I 372-7.
For private letting of farm-lands see Lysias VII § 4-10 pp 108-9 (one
tenant was a freedman), Isaeus XI § 42.

[354] Isaeus VI §§ 19-22, VIII § 35, XI §§ 41-4.

[355] Isocr _Areopagiticus_ § 52 p 150.

[356] Lysias I §§ 11, 13, p 92.

[357] Antiphon fragm 50 Blass.

[358] Isocr _Panath_ § 179 p 270.

[359] Isocr _Philippus_ §§ 48-9 pp 91-2.

[360] Isocr _de pace_ §§ 117-8 p 183.

[361] Isocr _Paneg_ §§ 34-7 pp 47-8, _de pace_ § 24 p 164, _Panathen_ §§
13, 14, p 235, §§ 43-4 p 241, etc.

[362] Isocr _Paneg_ § 132 pp 67-8.

[363] Isocr _Areopag_ § 44 p 148.

[364] Isocr _de pace_ § 90 p 177, _Areopag_ §§ 54-5 pp 150-1, § 83 p 156.

[365] Isaeus VIII § 42 p 73, cf Aristophanes _Nub_ 71-2.

[366] Andocides _de pace_ § 15 p 25, § 36 p 28.

[367] Isocr _de pace_ § 92 p 177.

[368] Lysias VII especially §§ 4-11 pp 108-9.

[369] Lysias VII § 16 p 109.

[370] See especially the _Archidamus_ §§ 8, 28, 87, 88, 96, 97.

[371] Isaeus fragm 3 Scheibe.

[372] Isaeus VI § 33 σὺν τῷ αἰπόλῳ.

[373] See Isocrates _Plataicus_ § 48 p 306 (of Plataeans), and Isaeus V §
39 with Wyse’s note.

[374] I should mention that for simplicity sake I refer to the _Politics_
by the books in the old order. Also that I do not raise the question of
the authorship of the first book of the so-called _Economics_, as the
point does not affect the argument. In common with all students of the
_Politics_ I am greatly indebted to the edition of Mr W L Newman.

[375] This χορηγία includes a population limited in number and of
appropriate qualities. _Politics_ VII 4, and 8 §§ 7-9.

[376] _Pol_ VII 4 § 6.

[377] See the story of Peisistratus and the peasant in Ἀθην πολ c 16.

[378] _Economics_ I 5 § 1, 6 § 5, _Pol_ I 7 § 5, and see the chapter on
Xenophon.

[379] _Pol_ VI 4 §§ 8-10.

[380] We have a modern analogue in the recent legislative measures in New
Zealand and Australia, not to speak of movements nearer home.

[381] See note on Plato, p 75.

[382] Ἀθην πολ cc 11, 12.

[383] A most interesting treatment of this topic is to be found in
Bryce’s _South America_ (1912) pp 330-1, 533, where we get it from the
modern point of view, under representative systems.

[384] See the general remarks _Pol_ IV 6 § 2, VI 4 §§ 1, 2, 13, 14. For
historical points Ἀθην πολ cc 16, 24.

[385] _Pol_ III 15 § 13.

[386] _Pol_ IV 4 §§ 15, 18, cf VII 9.

[387] _Pol_ VI 4 §§ 1, 2, 13.

[388] _Pol_ VI 4 § 11.

[389] Whether the πεπονημένη ἕξις (favourable to eugenic paternity) of
_Pol_ VII 16 §§ 12, 13, may include this class, is not clear. In Roman
opinion it certainly would.

[390] _Pol_ VII 6 § 8. Xenophon (see p 53) records cases of seamen ashore
and in straits working for hire on farms.

[391] See Sandys on Ἀθην πολ c 4.

[392] _Pol_ II 7 § 12.

[393] _Pol_ II 7 § 7.

[394] Severely criticized in _Pol_ II 6 § 15, though adopted by himself.
See below.

[395] See _Pol_ VI 5 §§ 8-10, on the measures that may be taken to secure
lasting εὐπορία.

[396] Cf IV 15 § 6, etc.

[397] E Barker _The political thought of Plato and Aristotle_.

[398] _Ethics_ II 1 § 4.

[399] _Pol_ VII 16.

[400] _Pol_ VII 8, 9, etc.

[401] _Pol_ VII 10.

[402] This adoption of the split land-lots (see above p 91) is perhaps
explained by the fact that the landowners are not αὐτουργοί, so the
difficulty of dual residence does not arise.

[403] _Pol_ IV 8 § 5, 9 § 4, etc.

[404] _Pol_ II 6 § 17, 9 §§ 21-2, IV 9 §§ 7-9. The same view is found in
Isocrates.

[405] _Pol_ VII 9 § 5.

[406] _Pol_ V 6 §§ 12, 13.

[407] _Pol_ VII 14, 15, VIII 4, cf II 9 § 34.

[408] _Economics_ I 5 § 3 δούλῳ δὲ μισθὸς τροφή. Cf the saying about the
ass, _Ethics_ X 5 § 8.

[409] Deinarchus refers (_in Dem_ § 69 p 99) to Demosthenes’ ownership of
a house in Peiraeus, and goes on to denounce him as heaping up money and
not holding real property, thus escaping taxation. Yet the laws enjoin
that a man who is a political leader ought γῆν ἐντὸς ορων κεκτῆσθαι. This
wild abuse at least is a sign of existent feelings.

[410] We may at least add slaves.

[411] _Pol_ VII 4 § 6.

[412] Aristotle, like most of the philosophers at Athens, was a metic.
See Bernays’ _Phokion_ note 8, in which the notable passage _Pol_ VII 2
§§ 3-7 is discussed.

[413] The author of _Revenues_ (πόροι).

[414] _Pol_ II 3 § 4, 5 § 8.

[415] _Pol_ I 7.

[416] Pol VII 10 § 14, _Econ_ I 5 § 5.

[417] But perhaps to some extent by the author of _Econ_ I 6 § 9.

[418] See _Econ_ I 5 §§ 1, 2, 6 § 5.

[419] _Pol_ II 3 § 4, 5 § 4.

[420] He only once (III 5 § 2) in the _Politics_ mentions ἀπελεύθεροι and
once in the _Rhetoric_ (III 8 § 1).

[421] Too often asserted to need references. But _Pol_ III 5 §§ 4-6 is
notable as pointing out that τεχνῖται were generally well-to-do, but
θῆτες poor.

[422] _Pol_ VII 6 §§ 3-8.

[423] _Pol_ I 8 §§ 3 foll.

[424] _Pol_ I 9.

[425] _Pol_ I 10, 11.

[426] _Pol_ I 11 § 1, and Mr Newman’s note.

[427] _Pol_ I 11 §§ 3-5.

[428] _Rhetoric_ I 9 § 27 πρὸς ἄλλον ζῆν, and Cope’s note.

[429] _Pol_ VI 8 § 3, VII 6 §§ 1-5.

[430] _Pol_ I 2 § 5, 5 §§ 8, 9, cf _Ethics_ VIII 11 § 6.

[431] _Pol_ I 13 § 13, cf II 5 § 28.

[432] _Pol_ I 5, 6.

[433] _Pol_ VII 6 §§ 7, 8.

[434] _Pol_ VII 15 §§ 1-6, VIII 4 §§ 1-5, and a number of passages in the
_Ethics_.

[435] Indeed in _Pol_ VII 15 §§ 2-3 he practically says so.

[436] _Pol_ VIII 3 § 7.

[437] _Pol_ VIII 4.

[438] _Pol_ II 5 § 19.

[439] _Pol_ II 10 § 16.

[440] _Pol_ VI 2 § 3, cf 4 § 20, and _Ethics_ X 10 § 13.

[441] _Pol_ VII 12 §§ 3-6.

[442] _Pol_ VII 8 § 7.

[443] II 6 § 6 ἀργοί (in his criticism of Plato’s _Laws_).

[444] _Rhet_ I 12 § 25, cf Plato _Rep_ 565 α αὐτουργοί τε καὶ ἀπράγμονες.

[445] _Rhet_ II 4 § 9, cf Euripides _Orestes_ 918-20.

[446] _de mundo_ 6 §§ 4, 7, 13.

[447] Even after the ruin of Phocis and the peace of 346 BC the old man
wrote in the same strain. But it was to Philip, in whom he recognised the
real master of Greece, that he now appealed.

[448] References are too numerous to be given here. A _locus classicus_
is Dem _Lept_ §§ 30-3 pp 466-7, on the case of Leucon the ruler of
Bosporus. We hear also of corn imported from Sicily and Egypt, and even
(Lycurg § 26 p 151) from Epirus to Corinth.

[449] Demosthenes _Olynth_ I § 27 p 17.

[450] (Dem) _c Polycl_ §§ 5, 6 pp 1207-8.

[451] A good case of such investment by guardians is Dem _Nausim_ § 7 p
986.

[452] Dem _F Leg_ § 314 p 442, εἶτα γεωργεῖς ἐκ τούτων καὶ σεμνὸς γέγονας.

[453] See cases in Aeschines _Timarch_ § 97 p 13, Dem _pro Phorm_ §§
4, 5 p 945. The inheritance of Demosthenes himself included no landed
property, _c Aphob_ I §§ 9-11 p 816.

[454] Dem _F Leg_ § 146 p 386, cf § 114 p 376, § 265 p 426, _de cor_ § 41
p 239.

[455] [Dem] _c Phaenipp_ §§ 5-7 pp 1040-1.

[456] Aeschines mentions two ἐσχατιαὶ in the estate of Timarchus.

[457] The lack of ξύλα in Attica made timber, like wheat, a leading
article of commerce, and dealing in it was a sign of a wealthy
capitalist. Cf Dem _F Leg_ § 114 p 376, _Mid_ § 167 p 568.

[458] I suspect this is an exaggeration.

[459] [Dem] _Lacrit_ §§ 31-3 p 933.

[460] Dem _Androt_ § 65 p 613, repeated in _Timocr_ § 172 p 753.

[461] Dem _Aristocr_ § 146 p 668.

[462] Dem _c Callicl_ _passim_.

[463] ἀστικοῦ, Dem _Callicl_ § 11 p 1274.

[464] [Dem] _Nicostr_ _passim_.

[465] [Dem] _Nicostr_ § 21 p 1253.

[466] Dem _Pantaen_ § 45 p 979.

[467] Dem _Eubulid_ § 65 p 1319.

[468] Aeschin _Timarch_ § 99 p 14.

[469] [Dem] _Euerg Mnes_ §§ 52-3 p 1155.

[470] Twice, §§ 53, 76.

[471] Hyperid _in Demosth_ fragm col 26.

[472] [Dem] _c Timoth_ § 11 p 1187.

[473] Dem _de Cor_ §§ 51-2 p 242.

[474] [Dem] _c Timoth_ § 51 p 1199.

[475] Ibid § 52.

[476] Of course οἰκέτης is often loosely used as merely ‘slave.’ But here
the antithesis seems to gain point from strict use.

[477] I have not found this question distinctly stated anywhere.
Beauchet _Droit privé_ IV 222 treats the μισθωτοὶ of this passage as
freemen. But in II 443 he says that slaves hired from their owners
were generally designated μισθωτοί. Nor do I find the point touched in
Meier-Schömann-Lipsius (edition 1883-7, pp 889 foll), or any evidence
that the πρόκλησις could be addressed to others than parties in a case.
Wallon I 322 foll also gives no help.

[478] Dem _Eubulid_ § 63 p 1318.

[479] Hyperides _pro Euxen_, fragm §§ 16, 17, col 12, 13.

[480] Dem _Olynth_ I § 27 p 17.

[481] [Dem] C PHAENIPP §§ 5-7 pp 1040-1, §§ 19-21 pp 1044-5.

[482] ὀπωρώνης, Dem DE COR § 262 p 314.

[483] Dem _Eubulid_ § 45 p 1313, speaking of an old woman.

[484] Aeschin _Timarch_ § 27 p 4.

[485] We have already seen the case of olive-pickers in Aristoph _Vesp_
712.

[486] See Dem _Mid_ § 48 p 530, etc.

[487] Aeschin _F Leg_ § 156 p 59. The passage of Dem _F L_ to which he
refers is not in our text, for §§ 194-5 pp 401-2 is different.

[488] See Plut _Aratus_ 14, 25, 27, 36, 39, 40, _Philopoemen_ 7, 15.

[489] Isocr _paneg_ § 50 p 50.

[490] V 64-5, cf XVII 9, 10.

[491] XVI.

[492] XVII.

[493] XXII, XXV.

[494] XXV.

[495] XXV 1, 51.

[496] XXV 27, cf XXIV 137.

[497] XXV 86-152.

[498] XXV 47-8.

[499] VII 15-6.

[500] III 35, cf XV 80.

[501] X 9, cf 1, XXI 3.

[502] XXIV 136-7.

[503] XX 3, 4.

[504] XVI 34-5.

[505] XXV 56-9.

[506] XIV 58-9, cf 13, 56, where στρατιώτας is a professional soldier.

[507] _Char_ IV (XIV Jebb).

[508] See Plutarch _de garrulitate_ 18.

[509] Plut _Aratus_ 24, _Philopoemen_ 8.

[510] Polyb IV 63.

[511] IV 66.

[512] IV 75, V 1, 3, 19.

[513] X 42, etc.

[514] XVIII 20.

[515] XVI 24, XXI 6, etc.

[516] XXI 34, 36, 43, 45.

[517] V 89.

[518] XXVIII 2.

[519] V 89, cf XXV 4, XXI 6.

[520] This topic is well treated by Mahaffy _Greek Life and Thought_
chapter I.

[521] The best treatment of this matter known to me is in Bernays’
_Phokion_ pp 78-85. See Diodorus XVIII 18, Plutarch _Phoc_ 28.

[522] According to Plut _Cleomenes_ 18, Sparta was very helpless before
that king’s reforms. The Aetolians in a raid carried off 50000 slaves,
and an old Spartan declared that this was a relief.

[523] Freeman’s _Federal Government_ chapter V.

[524] II 62.

[525] See Strabo VIII 8 § 1 p 388, and cf Plut _Philopoemen_ 13.

[526] Polyb IV 73. Theocritus had spoken of ἱππήλατος Ἆλις (XXII 156).
Keeping horses was a mark of wealth.

[527] Theocritus XXII 157 Ἀρκαδία τ’ εὔμαλος Ἀχαιῶν τε πτολίεθρα. Polyb
IX 17, and IV 3 (Messenia).

[528] Eubulus fragm 12, 34, 39, 53, 66, Kock. Also other references in
Athenaeus X pp 417 foll.

[529] Polyb XX 6. Otherwise Mahaffy in _Gk Life and Thought_ chapter XIII.

[530] _FHG_ II pp 254-64, formerly attributed to Dicaearchus. Cited by E
Meyer _Kleine Schriften_ p 137.

[531] II 62.

[532] IV 38.

[533] IV 73, 75.

[534] XXIII 1 § 11.

[535] In the famous case of the siege of Rhodes in 305-4 BC (Diodorus XX
84, 100) freedom seems to have been a _reward_, as has been pointed out
by A Croiset.

[536] IV 20, 21. Compare Vergil _Buc_ X 32-3 _soli cantare periti
Arcades_, VII 4-5.

[537] In a fragment cited by Athenaeus p 272 _a_, cf 264 _c_. In
Hultsch’s text Polyb XII 6.

[538] Cited by Diodorus II 39, and by Arrian _Indica_ 10 §§ 8, 9.

[539] Calderini _la manomissione_ etc chapter V.

[540] See table in Collitz _Dialectinschriften_ II pp 635-42.

[541] παραμονά, παραμένειν.

[542] In 432 acts of manumission given in Wescher and Foucart
_Inscriptions de Delphes_ 1863, I could not find one case of a rustic
slave.

[543] Ar _Pol_ II 3 § 4, cf saying of Diogenes in Stob _flor_ LXII 47.
Menander fragm 760 K εἷς ἐστι δοῦλος οἰκίας ὁ δεσπότης.

[544] See above, chapter XIII p 64.

[545] So Jove _Poenulus_ 944-5.

[546] _Casina_ 97 foll, _Poenulus_ 170-1, _Mostellaria_ 1-83.

[547] _Mercator_ 65 foll.

[548] _Mercator_ _passim_.

[549] _Trinummus_ 508-61.

[550] _Vidularia_ 31-2.

[551] _Vidularia_ 21-55, text is fragmentary.

[552] But not excluding it, since slaves were hired.

[553] _Hautontimorumenos_ 62-74.

[554] _Hautont_ 93-117.

[555] _Hautont_ 142-4.

[556] _Phormio_ 362-5, cf _Adelphoe_ 949.

[557] _Hecyra_ 224-6.

[558] _Adelphoe_ 45-6, cf 95, 401, 517-20, 845-9.

[559] _Adelphoe_ 541-2.

[560] Collitz I No. 345, Dittenberger 238-9. Mommsen’s notes in Hermes
XVII.

[561] καὶ τὴν χώραν μᾶλλον ἐξεργασθήσεσθαι.

[562] That this neglect was not a new thing seems shewn by the saying of
Alexander that the Thessalians deserved no consideration, ὅτι τὴν ἀρίστην
κεκτημένοι οὐ γεωργοῦσι. Plut _apophth Alex_ 22.

[563] Livy XXXIV 51 §§ 4-6.

[564] Plutarch _Aratus_ 5-8.

[565] Plut _Dion_ 27, 37, 48.

[566] Plut _Timoleon_ 23, 36.

[567] Plut _Aratus_ 9, 12, 14.

[568] Plut _Philopoemen_ 3, 4.

[569] In fact became an αὐτουργός.

[570] _Bevölkerung der Griechisch-Römischen Welt_ pp 156-8.

[571] Diodorus XVIII 70 § 1.

[572] Livy XXXIV 50, Plut _Flamininus_ 13.

[573] Polyb XXXIX 8 §§ 1-5.

[574] Only in Appian _civ_ I 8 § 2. The provision is ascribed by Suet
_Jul_ 42 to Julius Caesar. The two writers were contemporary. Whence did
Appian get his story?

[575] Case of Persia.

[576] Cases of Messana, Syracuse, etc.

[577] Case of Carthage.

[578] Livy II 23 etc.

[579] Referred to in Iwan Müller’s _Handbuch_ IV ii 2, ed 3 pp 533 foll,
article by H Blümner.

[580] That the household as a vigorous unit outlived the _gens_ is I
think clear. I guess that this was because production for the supply of
life-needs was more closely correlated with the former. Labour was more
easily divorced from the clan-system than property was.

[581] Cic _Cato mai_ § 56, Liv III 26, Dionys X 8, 17, Plin _NH_ XVIII
20, Valer Max IV 7. The discrepancies in the versions do not concern us
here.

[582] Liv III 13 §§ 8-10, Dionys X 8.

[583] Liv III 27 § 1.

[584] Liv X 36 § 17, Dionys VI 3, etc.

[585] Liv II 22 §§ 5-7.

[586] Varro _sat Men_ fr 59 and title of his satire _Marcipor_.
Quintilian I 4 § 26, Festus p 306 L = 257 M _Marcipor Oppii_ in title of
Plaut _Stichus_. Sallust _hist_ fr III 99 Maurenbrecher. Inscriptions CIL
I 1076, 1034, 1386, Dessau 7822-3. For Pliny see below.

[587] Argument as in Luke’s gospel 17 §§ 7-9.

[588] Cic _Cato mai_ §§ 55-6, etc.

[589] Dionys XIX 15.

[590] Preserved in a fragment of Dion Cassius, fr 40 § 27.

[591] Columella I 4 § 2, Pliny _NH_ XVIII §§ 27-8, cf Valer Max IV 4 § 4.

[592] Livy _epit_ XVIII.

[593] Valer Max IV 4 § 6. The version given in Seneca _ad Helv_ 12 § 5
is much the same, but ends characteristically _fuitne tanti servum non
habere, ut colonus eius populus Romanus esset?_ Here _colonus_ = tenant
farmer.

[594] _colendum locari._

[595] Plin _NH_ XVIII § 39.

[596] Polyb I 31 § 4.

[597] Cato 5 § 4 (of duties of _vilicus_) _operarium mercennarium
politorem diutius eundem ne habeat die_.

[598] How far we can infer this from references to slaves such as Livy
XXIII 32 § 15 (215 BC), XXV 1 § 4 (213 BC), XXVI 35 § 5 (210 BC), is not
quite certain. The Licinian law to check the grabbing of state domain
land certainly does not prove it, for that land was probably for the most
part pasture.

[599] Liv XXVIII 11 § 9.

[600] Weissenborn’s note on the passage.

[601] Liv XXII 57 § 11, and index to Livy under _volones_.

[602] Liv XXIII 49 §§ 1-4, XXIV 18 § 11, XXV 1 § 4, 3 § 8-4 § 11.

[603] Liv XXI 63 §§ 3, 4, Cic II _in Verr_ V § 45.

[604] Liv XXVI 36.

[605] Liv XXIX 16 §§ 1-3.

[606] Liv XXXI 13.

[607] See Rudorff _gromatische Institutionen_ pp 287-8.

[608] Liv XXXIII 42 § 3.

[609] _lex agraria_, line 31, in Bruns’ _fontes_ or Wordsworth’s
_Specimens_.

[610] Appian _civ_ I 7 § 5. But the account given in this passage of the
spread of _latifundia_ and slave-gangs is too loose to be of much value.
In particular, the assertion that slave-breeding was already common and
lucrative is not to be believed. Appian was misled by the experience of
his own day. See Sallust _Iug_ 41 § 8 _interea parentes aut parvi liberi
militum, uti quisque potentiori confinis erat, sedibus pellebantur_.

[611] The urban artisans engaged in the sedentary trades do not concern
us here. See Weissenborn on Liv VIII 20 § 4 _opificum vulgus et
sellularii_.

[612] Dionys III 31, IV 9, 13, etc.

[613] Dionys VI 79, a passage much coloured by later notions.

[614] Liv VII 4, 5. A slightly different and shorter version in Cic _de
off_ III § 112.

[615] Cic _pro Sex Roscio_ § 46 recognizes this familiarity.

[616] Sallust _Catil_ 4 § 1.

[617] Cic _pro Sex Roscio_ §§ 39-51.

[618] Cic _pro Sex Roscio_ §§ 50-1.

[619] Livy VI 12 § 5, cf VII 25 § 8.

[620] Dionys XVII [XVIII] 4. L Postumius Megellus was consul 305, 294,
291 BC. The story relates to his third consulship. His earlier career may
be followed in Liv IX 44, X 26 § 15, 32 § 1, 37, 46 § 16.

[621] Liv _epit_ XI.

[622] See the precept of Mago cited by Pliny _NH_ XVIII § 35.

[623] That is, on those possessed of a certain minimum of property,
which was lowered in course of time. Originally reckoned on land only,
thus reckoning only those settled on farms (_adsidui_). See Mommsen
_Staatsrecht_ index. The rise in the census numbers between 131 and 125
BC is explained by Greenidge _History_ p 150 as due to the increase of
_adsidui_ through effect of Gracchan legislation.

[624] See Greenidge _History_ pp 60-1, 424-5.

[625] See Cato’s opinion cited by Cic _de off_ II § 89, Columella VI
_praef_ §§ 3-5, Plin _NH_ XVIII §§ 29, 30.

[626] Cic _in Catil_ II § 18.

[627] Cic _in Catil_ II § 20, cf _de lege agr_ II § 78 _fundos quorum
subsidio familiarum magnitudines sustentare possint_.

[628] _familiis magnis._

[629] Livy VI 12 § 5, cf VII 25 § 8.

[630] Cairnes _The Slave Power_ ch III. [1862, second edn. 1863.]

[631] Cic _de republ_ III § 16.

[632] But see the oratorical picture of the bad steward, Cic II _in
Verrem_ III § 119. That remarkable passage still leaves my questions
unanswered, for the comparison with Verres is superficial and only serves
a temporary purpose.

[633] Varro I 2 § 17, 17 §§ 5, 7.

[634] Cato 2 § 7, cf Martial XI 70.

[635] As Cato 5 § 2 says, _dominus inpune ne Sinat esse_.

[636] Foreshadowed in Xenophon _memor_ II 8.

[637] Compare the case of the _mercennarius_ and Regulus referred to
above.

[638] Columella I _praef_ §§ 3, 12, 13, 20, XII _praef_ §§ 8-10.

[639] Pliny _NH_ XVIII §§ 41-3 (of earlier times), XIV §§ 48-50
(speculations), XVIII §§ 273-4.

[640] M Weber _Römische Agrargeschichte_ pp 242 foll.

[641] Sueton _Aug_ 32, _Tib_ 8, cf Seneca the elder _contr_ X 4 § 18.
Later, Spart _Hadr_ 18. In law, Digest XXXIX 4 § 12².

[642] Even a _valetudinarium_ is provided. See Columella XI 1 § 18, XII 1
§ 6, 3 §§ 7, 8.

[643] Columella I 7.

[644] Weber _op cit_ pp 244-5. See the chapter on Columella for this
interpretation. It can hardly be considered certain, but it is not vital
to the argument.

[645] Varro I 17 § 2, cf Colum I 3 § 12.

[646] Varro I 17 §§ 3-6.

[647] Plato _Laws_ 777 _d_, Arist _Pol_ VII 10 § 13, [Ar] _Oec_ I 5 § 6.

[648] Livy XXXIII 36 § 1.

[649] Livy XXXIX 29 §§ 8, 9, cf 41 § 6.

[650] Diodorus book XXXIV, and other authorities enumerated in my _Roman
Republic_ § 683.

[651] Strabo XIV 1 § 38 [p 646], Diodorus XXXIV 2 § 26.

[652] Diodorus XXXVI.

[653] According to Appian _civ_ I 116 § 2 he was at first joined by some
free rustics. The same seems to have been the case in Sicily and Asia.

[654] Sallust _Catil_ 44 §§ 5, 6, 56 § 5.

[655] Tacitus _ann_ IV 27.

[656] Tacitus _ann_ III 53-5.

[657] Text edited by Keil 1895.

[658] Plutarch _Cato maior_ 27.

[659] Jordan’s edition of his remains, p 77, Plut _Cat mai_ 23.

[660] Pliny _NH_ XVIII §§ 29, 30, and Cicero _de off_ II § 89, Columella
VI _praef_ §§ 3-5.

[661] Jordan _op cit_ p 43. Plutarch _Cat mai_ 4.

[662] Plut _Cat mai_ 3-5, 20-1.

[663] Cato _agr_ 3 § 1, Pliny _NH_ XVIII § 32.

[664] Cato _agr_ 4.

[665] Cato _agr_ 56-7.

[666] Cato _agr_ 16, 136-7, 146.

[667] In 147 the _emptor_ of a season’s lambs seems to be bound to
provide a _pastor_, who is held as a pledge to secure the final
settlement.

[668] Cato _agr praef_.

[669] Cato _agr_ 10 § 1, 11 § 1.

[670] 2 § 7 _patrem familias vendacem non emacem esse oportet_.

[671] Cato _agr_ 1.

[672] Mommsen in _Hermes_ XV p 408.

[673] _praef_ § 2, 1 § 4. According to a speaker in Seneca _controv_ VII
6 § 17 Cato’s later wife was _coloni sui filiam ... ingenuam_. Plut _Cat
mai_ 24 makes her πελάτιν, that is daughter of a client. There seems to
be no real contradiction. The _cliens_ might be his patron’s tenant.

[674] 2 § 7 _boves vetulos ... servum senem, servum morbosum ... vendat_.
Cf Plut _Cat mai_ 5, Martial XI 70, Juvenal X 268-70. In Terence
_Hautont_ 142-4 the Old Man, on taking to farming, sells off all his
household slaves save such as are able to pay for their keep _opere
rustico faciundo_. His motive for giving up domestic comfort and taking
to hard manual labour on the land is to punish himself. So _ibid_ 65-74
he appears as neglecting to keep his farm-hands at work.

[675] Plut _Cat mai_ 21.

[676] Pliny _NH_ XVIII § 35.

[677] Polyb XXXII 13 §§ 10, 11.

[678] Plut _Cat mai_ 21, 25, 4.

[679] Jordan _op cit_ p 43.

[680] Cf Plin _epist_ III 19 § 5.

[681] Plut _Cat mai_ 21, 4.

[682] Plut _Cat mai_ 20.

[683] Pliny even refers to his precepts as _oracula_.

[684] Cato _agr_ 1 § 3 _operariorum copia siet_.

[685] Cato _agr_ 4 _operas facilius locabis, operarios facilius conduces_.

[686] Cato _agr_ 5, 83, 143.

[687] Cato _agr_ 2 § 1.

[688] Cato _agr_ 13 § 1 _duo custodes liberi ... tertius servus_ ... etc.

[689] Ibid 66 _ubi factores vectibus prement_.

[690] Ibid 64 § 1.

[691] Ibid 144.

[692] Ibid 144-5.

[693] Ibid 146.

[694] Ibid 149 § 2.

[695] Ibid 150.

[696] Ibid 66-7.

[697] Ibid 56.

[698] Ibid 10 § 1, 11 § 1.

[699] It is to be noted that _bubulci_ are to be indulgently treated, in
order to encourage them to tend the valued oxen with care. 5 § 6.

[700] Ibid 56 _compeditis ... ubi vineam fodere coeperint_. Cf Columella
I 9 § 4.

[701] Ibid 14.

[702] Ibid 16, 38.

[703] Ibid 136. In 5 § 4 the _politor_ appears as a hired wage-earner,
apparently paid by the job. In Varro III 2 § 5 we find _fundo ... polito
cultura_. See Nonius p 66 M for _politiones = agrorum cultus diligentes_.
Greenidge _hist_ p 79 regards the _politores_ as métayer tenants, why, I
do not know.

[704] Ibid 7 § 2, 21 § 5.

[705] Ibid 5, especially § 4 _operarium, mercennarium, politorem diutius
eundem ne habeat die_. This is taken by Wallon II pp 100, 345, to mean
that these hired men are to be paid off at the end of their stipulated
term. Keil thinks they are to be dischargeable at a day’s notice.
_eundem_ seems to imply that it was convenient to change your hired men
often.

[706] Ibid 2 § 2, and § 4 _viam publicam muniri_.

[707] The account given in Greenidge’s _History of Rome_ deserves special
reference here. On pp 266-7 he well points out that it was not the
Gracchan aim to revive the free labourer but the peasant proprietor.

[708] This is known from the _lex agraria_ of which a large part is
preserved. See text in Bruns’ _Fontes_ or Wordsworth’s _Specimens_.
Translated and explained in Dr E G Hardy’s _Six Roman Laws_.

[709] Perhaps some inference may be drawn from Sallust _Iug_ 73 § 6
_plebes sic accensa uti opifices agrestesque omnes, quorum res fidesque
in manibus sitae erant, relictis operibus frequentarent Marium_ ... etc,
though this refers directly to political support, not to the recruiting
of troops.

[710] See the important paper by Dr E G Hardy _Journ Phil_ 1913.

[711] _Monum Ancyr_ III 22 [cap XVI].

[712] Varro _RR_ I 2 §§ 3, 6. I find since writing this that Heisterbergk
_Entstehung des Colonats_ p 57 treats this utterance, rightly, as
rhetorical.

[713] See Mr Storr-Best’s translation, Introduction pp xxvii-xxx.

[714] _RR_ I 4 § 5. Surely in 49 Varro was in Spain.

[715] As in _RR_ II _praef_ § 6.

[716] The wild hill-pastures are referred to by Varro _RR_ II 1 § 16 as
still leased to _publicani_ to whom the _scriptura_ or registration fees
had to be paid. I have given further references in my _Roman Republic_ §
1351. See M Weber _Römische Agrargeschichte_ pp 135 foll.

[717] _RR_ I 18.

[718] _RR_ I 17.

[719] _RR_ I 6-16.

[720] [_genus_] _vocale_, _semivocale_, _mutum_.

[721] These are specimens only. Others would be hired freemen, asses, and
(near a river) barges.

[722] _ipsi_ suggests peasant owners.

[723] _pauperculi cum sua progenie._

[724] _mercennariis ... conducticiis liberorum operis._

[725] _obaerarios_ or _obaeratos_, who work off a debt by labour for a
creditor.

[726] _de quibus universis._ This seems to refer to all human workers.

[727] _gravia loca._ Cf I 12 § 2.

[728] _operarios parandos esse_, not _conducendos_, for these are clearly
slaves. Cf I 16 § 4.

[729] The text here is damaged. I give the apparent meaning.

[730] _qui praesint_, a very general expression.

[731] That is, obedience.

[732] _offensiones domesticas._ Varro may have in mind the Syrians in the
Sicilian slave-wars and the Thracians and Gauls under Spartacus.

[733] _peculium._

[734] Here also the text is doubtful.

[735] _RR_ II 3 § 7 _in lege locationis fundi excipi solet ne colonus
capra natum in fundo pascat_.

[736] _RR_ I 2 § 17 _leges colonicas_ ... etc.

[737] Caesar _BC_ I 34, 56.

[738] _servis libertis colonis suis._

[739] _colonis pastoribusque._

[740] As a creditor on a debtor.

[741] _RR_ I 16 § 4 _itaque in hoc genus coloni potius anniversarios
habent vicinos, quibus imperent, medicos fullones fabros, quam in villa
suos habeant_.

[742] _RR_ II _praef_ § 5, cf I 2 § 13 foll, and Columella VI _praef_ §§
1, 2.

[743] They evidently own slaves, though not special craftsmen, and are
distinct from the _pauperculi_ of I 17 § 2.

[744] _RR_ II _praef_ §§ 3, 4.

[745] _RR_ III 16 §§ 10, 11.

[746] _RR_ II 10 §§ 4, 5.

[747] _RR_ I 22 § 1. Basket work is often referred to in scenes of
country life. Cf Verg _buc_ II 71-2, _georg_ I 266.

[748] _RR_ III 3 § 4, 17 § 6.

[749] Cf Cato 56, Columella I 9 § 4.

[750] _RR_ I 18 §§ 2, 6.

[751] _valetudini tempestati inertiae indiligentiae._

[752] In _RR_ III 2 § 5 _cum villa non sit sine fundo magno et eo polito
cultura_ the reference is quite general.

[753] This is well illustrated by the words of Cicero _de republ_ V § 5.

[754] As in his opinion the younger Cato did.

[755] See _pro Murena_ § 62, where _disputandi causa_ is opposed to _ita
vivendi_.

[756] See _Brutus_ § 257, _de orat_ I §§ 83, 263, II § 40, _de finibus_ V
§ 52, _Tusc disp_ I § 34, III § 77, V § 104. The _messores_ whose rustic
brogue is referred to in _de orat_ III § 46 surely are free Italians.

[757] From lack of the _ingenuae artes_ and _liberales doctrinae_ etc.

[758] _de offic_ I § 150 _inliberales autem et sordidi quaestus
mercennariorum omnium quorum operae non quorum artes emuntur: est enim in
illis ipsa merces auctoramentum servitutis_.

[759] The _operae_ often referred to.

[760] The _familiae publicanorum_. The _publicani_ complained loudly
when their slave-staff was in danger from the violence of others. Cf _de
imperio Pompei_ § 16.

[761] Cf the famous case of Clodius and Milo.

[762] Cf _pro Rosc com_ §§ 32, 49, 54, _pro Tullio_ § 21.

[763] For a discussion of these see Greenidge in the Appendix to _The
legal procedure of Cicero’s time_.

[764] _pro Tullio_ §§ 7-12.

[765] _pro Tullio_ §§ 14-22.

[766] § 17 _mittit ad procuratorem litteras et ad vilicum_.

[767] To conduct of this kind Cicero makes a general reference in
_Paradoxa_ VI § 46 _expulsiones vicinorum ... latrocinia in agris_.

[768] _pro Caecina_ §§ 10-19.

[769] _pro Caecina_ § 1 _in agro locisque desertis_.

[770] _pro Vareno_ fragm 5, _pro Cluentio_ § 161, cf _pro Tullio_ § 8.

[771] _in toga candida_ fragm 11 _alter pecore omni vendito et saltibus
prope addictis pastores retinet, ex quibus ait se cum velit subito
fugitivorum bellum excitaturum_. For the _fugitivi_ in Sicily cf II
_in Verrem_ II § 27, III § 66, IV § 112, V _passim_, and the famous
inscription of Popilius, Wilmanns 797 and Wordsworth _specimens_ pp 221,
475, CIL I 551, referring to first Sicilian slave-war.

[772] _Brutus_ § 85.

[773] _pro Roscio Amer_ §§ 39-51.

[774] _pro Caecina_ §§ 58, 63.

[775] Thus in _pro Cluentio_ § 163 a disreputable tool is _mercennarius
Oppianici_.

[776] _de officiis_ I § 151 _quorum ordini conveniunt_.

[777] _de officiis_ I § 41.

[778] II _in Verrem_ I § 147, IV § 77.

[779] Thus of orators, _Brutus_ § 297, _de orat_ I §§ 83, 263, cf II §
40. Also _opifex_ in _Tusc disp_ V § 34.

[780] _de orat_ I § 249 _si mandandum aliquid procuratori de agri cultura
aut imperandum vilico est_.

[781] _pro Tullio_ § 17 _mittit ad procuratorem litteras et ad vilicum_.

[782] Cicero’s own estate at Arpinum seems to have been let in
_praediola_ to tenants. See _ad Att_ XIII 9 § 2.

[783] _pro Caecina_ §§ 17, 57, 94.

[784] _pro Caecina_ § 57, cf 63. So in § 58 the word _familia_ is shewn
not to be limited to slaves personally owned by the litigant referred to.

[785] II _in Verrem_ III §§ 53-5, and _passim_. These _arationes_ paid
_decumae_.

[786] _pro Cluentio_ §§ 175, 182.

[787] _de orat_ II § 287.

[788] _de republ_ V § 5, where the perfect ruler is a sort of blend of
_dispensator_ and _vilicus_.

[789] _pro Plancio_ § 62.

[790] II _in Verrem_ III § 119.

[791] _pro Rabirio_ §§ 10-17.

[792] _hanc condicionem ... quam servi, si libertatis spem propositam non
haberent, ferre nullo modo possent._

[793] _Philippic_ VIII § 32.

[794] Cic _ad fam_ XVI 16 § 1 _eum indignum illa fortuna nobis amicum
quam servum esse maluisti_.

[795] _pro Roscio Amer_ § 120 _homines paene operarios_.

[796] II _in Verrem_ III § 27.

[797] _quid, qui singulis iugis arant, qui ab opere ipsi non recedunt_
... etc.

[798] The infamous henchman of Verres.

[799] Diodorus fragm XXXIV 2 § 48, XXXVI 5 § 6.

[800] _de lege agr_ II §§ 80-3.

[801] See Beloch _Campanien_ pp 304-6.

[802] _de lege agr_ II § 84 _agros desertos a plebe atque a cultura
hominum liberorum esse non oportere_.

[803] _genus ... optimorum et aratorum et militum ... illi miseri, nati
in illis agris et educati, glaebis subigendis exercitati_ ... etc.

[804] _de lege agr_ II §§ 88-9 _locus comportandis condendisque
fructibus, ut aratores cultu agrorum defessi urbis domiciliis uterentur
... receptaculum aratorum, nundinas rusticorum, cellam atque horreum
Campani agri_ ... etc.

[805] _de lege agr_ II § 82 _deinde ad paucos opibus et copiis adfluentis
totum agrum Campanum perferri videbitis_.

[806] See above, chap XXV p 183.

[807] Sallust _Cat_ 4 § 1.

[808] Sallust _Cat_ 37 § 7 _iuventus, quae in agris manuum mercede
inopiam toleraverat_ ... etc.

[809] Sallust _Iug_ 73 § 6 _opifices agrestesque omnes, quorum res
fidesque in manibus sitae erant_ ... etc.

[810] Two notorious instances are Pompey and M Brutus.

[811] Horace _Odes_ II 15, III 6, etc.

[812] Horace _Odes_ IV 5, 15, etc.

[813] A picture forestalled by Lucretius III 1053-75.

[814] Already illustrated in the case of Cato noted above.

[815] See Cic _de legibus_ III § 30. Cf Horace _epodes_ IV.

[816] See Rostowzew, _Röm Colonat_, for detailed inquiry into Eastern
phenomena, Egyptian in particular. For the case of China see reference
to Macgowan [Appendix D 6]. A very interesting account of the system in
Hindustan in the 17th century, with criticism of its grave abuses, may
be found in the _Travels in the Mogul empire_ by François Bernier, ed 2
by V A Smith, Oxford 1914, pages 226-38. I believe the legal phrase is
‘Eminent Domain.’

[817] In Greenidge, _History_ pp 292-3, there are some good remarks on
the process.

[818] Frontinus grom I p 35, Columella III 3 § 11, and Heisterbergk’s
remarks cited below. See Index, _Italian land and taxation_.

[819] Tacitus _ann_ II 59 _seposuit Aegyptum hist_ I 11 _domi retinere_.
This need not be taken to mean that he treated it strictly as part of his
private estate, as Mommsen thought. See on the controversy a note of E
Meyer _Kl Schr_ p 479.

[820] See M Weber _Agrargeschichte_ pp 243 foll.

[821] The estates of Atticus in Epirus are a leading case of this.
Horace _epist_ I 12 refers to those of Agrippa in Sicily. Such cases
have nothing to do with emigration of working farmers, in which I do not
believe. Surely Greenidge _History_ p 270 is right in saying that the
Gracchan scheme of colonization was commercial rather than agricultural.
Also the municipalities, beside their estates in Italy, held lands in
the Provinces. See Tyrrell and Purser on Cic _ad fam_ XIII 7 and 11. In
general, Seneca _epist_ 87 § 7, 89 § 20, Florus II 7 § 3.

[822] We may perhaps carry this back into the time of the Republic. See
the references to the royal domains of Macedon, Livy XLV 18 § 3, and with
others Cic _de lege agr_ II § 50.

[823] See the chapter on the African inscriptions.

[824] For the cases of India and China see references to Sir A Fraser and
Macgowan [Appendix D 6].

[825] Tacitus _ann_ XIV 27 records the failure of Nero’s colonization
of veterans singly in Italy, who mostly returned to the scenes of their
service. He strangely regrets the abandonment of the old plan of settling
them in whole legions. It is to be remembered that in the later Empire
the army was more and more recruited from the barbarians.

[826] The γῆ κληρουχική, assigned in κλῆροι to soldiers.

[827] See Herodotus II 165-7, cf 141, Strabo XV 1 § 40 (p 704), § 34 (p
701), § 54 (p 710), cf Diodorus II 40-1, Arrian _Indica_ 10 §§ 8, 9. The
references to slave-traffic in the _Periplus maris Erythraei_ do not
really imply existence of a slave-system in India. See Rapson _Ancient
India_ p 97. Much of interest in Sir J D Rees, _The real India_, on
the Land-system etc. In _The early history of India_ by V A Smith the
existence of slavery in India is maintained.

[828] See Dionysius II 28, cf 8, 9.

[829] The _operae_ referred to in the African inscriptions.

[830] It is possible to see a beginning of this system in the
tenancy-on-shares (the _colonia partiaria_) which we find not only in
Italy but in Africa as a recognized plan.

[831] This is the view of Rostowzew _Röm Colonat_ p 397.

[832] Hor _Sat_ II 7 23, _Epist_ II 1 139-40.

[833] Hor _Odes_ I 12.

[834] _Odes_ II 15, 18, _Sat_ II 6 6-15.

[835] _Odes_ III 6.

[836] _Odes_ III 5. See above pp 139-40.

[837] _Odes_ III 1 _redemptor cum famulis_.

[838] _Odes_ II 3, _Epist_ II 2 177-8.

[839] _Odes_ I 1, II 16, III 16.

[840] _Odes_ I 1 _patrios ... agros_, Epode II 3 _paterna rura bobus
exercet suis_.

[841] _Epode_ IV 13 _arat Falerni mille fundi iugera_, etc.

[842] _Odes_ III 16 _quicquid arat impiger Apulus_.

[843] _Epode_ II 39 foll.

[844] A fact recognized by Horace himself in lines 14-16 of _Odes_ III 4,
and _Sat_ I 5 lines 77 foll.

[845] _Odes_ I 35 _pauper ... ruris colonus_, II 14 _inopes coloni_.
_Sat_ II 2 115, where the fact of expulsion in favour of a military
pensioner is judiciously ignored. See below.

[846] These _coloni_ of course owned their farms; that is, were _domini_.
_Odes_ III 4 lines 37-8, _Sat_ II 6 55-6.

[847] _Odes_ I 1 _mercator ... indocilis pauperiem pati_, cf III 2.

[848] So Cicero’s estate at Arpinum is spoken of _ad Att_ XIII 9 § 2 as
_praediola_ and was perhaps let in the same way.

[849] Cf Seneca _epist_ 47 § 14, 86 § 14.

[850] The ownership of the slaves is another matter, for in letting farms
the _dominus_ often supplied the slaves. See Index, _instrumentum_.

[851] I find that Mr Warde Fowler, _The death of Turnus_ p 105, also
takes this view. But he understands _pater_ to imply that the man brought
up a family, which I do not. I agree that it gives the idea of headship
of a household.

[852] _Italische Landeskunde_ II p 615.

[853] The description of such an _agellus_ in Plin _epist_ I 24
illustrates the wants of a literary landowner excellently.

[854] Tibullus II 1 51 _agricola adsiduo ... satiatus aratro_.

[855] Tibullus II 6 25-6.

[856] Ovid _fasti_ I 207, III 779-82, IV 693-4.

[857] Ovid _metam_ I 135-6, Manilius I 73-4.

[858] Vitruvius II 1.

[859] I cannot accept Prof. Richmond’s view (Inaugural lecture 1919 p 25)
of the _Georgics_ as ‘concerned with every side of husbandry.’

[860] Whether Vergil suffered two expulsions, and what is the
chronological order of eclogues I and IX, are questions that do not
affect my inquiry.

[861] Pliny _epist_ III 10 § 7.

[862] _Aen_ VII 641-817, IX 603-13.

[863] e.g. _Aen_ VI 613.

[864] Ellis on Catullus XXIII 1.

[865] See page 217.

[866] Sueton _Vespas_ I.

[867] Keightley includes Mago, whether rightly or not I am not sure.
Conington’s Introduction treats this matter fully.

[868] The futility of addressing rustic readers in polished literary
language (_diserte_) is commented on by Palladius [4th cent AD] in his
opening sentences. He has been thought to have in view Columella, who by
the by is Vergil’s great admirer. I cannot accept the views of Daubeny in
his _Lectures_ pp 3-5. It is possible that the use of fire in improving
land may be a bit of Vergil’s own advice, but I doubt it. See Daubeny pp
91-4, _georg_ I 84 foll.

[869] E Meyer _Kl Schr_ p 488 describing the hopeless task of Augustus in
attempting the moral and physical regeneration of Italy makes the general
remark ‘Nur an die höheren Stände, nur an die Elite, konnte Augustus sich
wenden.’ This is a true picture of the situation as a whole. To have to
begin building at the top was fatal.

[870] Most clearly stated in Columella I 7.

[871] For _coloni_ of Cicero’s time see II _in Verr_ III § 55, _pro
Caecina_ § 94, _pro Cluent_ §§ 175, 182. The references in Horace are
given below. That letting to tenants was practised about 100 BC or
earlier, appears certain from the reference to Saserna’s opinion on this
policy in Columella I 7 § 4.

[872] Velleius II 88, and many passages in Seneca and other authors.

[873] Dion Cass LII 27-8.

[874] Compare Suet _Aug_ 41 for the Emperor’s actual policy. It seems
that the influx of specie captured at Alexandria sent the rate of
interest down and the price of land up.

[875] This is admirably dealt with in Sellar’s _Virgil_, and need not be
reproduced here.

[876] Mr T R Glover, _Virgil_ p 14, reminds us that the poet’s father is
said to have done some business in timber at one time.

[877] When Cicero _de orat_ III § 46 credits _messores_ with a rustic
brogue he can hardly be thinking of foreign slaves.

[878] As in Lucan VII 402 _vincto fossore_.

[879] Varro _RR_ II 10.

[880] See Varro _RR_ II 2 § 20, 5 § 18, 7 § 16, even for treatment of
_homines_ 10 § 10. Written books of prescriptions were provided.

[881] _Georg_ III 515-30.

[882] _tristis_ suggests the owner. A slave was not likely to care.

[883] In Sellar’s _Virgil_ chapter VI § 5 there is an excellent treatment
of this episode, with a discussion of V’s relation to Lucretius and a
most apposite quotation from G Sand.

[884] Varro II 5 § 4, Columella VI _praef_ § 7, Plin _NH_ VIII § 180.

[885] The _molle atque facetum_ attributed to V by Horace is I think
rightly explained by Quintilian VI 3 § 20, and amounts to easy and
fastidious taste, of course the result of careful revision, his practice
of which is attested in the Suetonian biography.

[886] So Tibullus II 1 41-2.

[887] Cf Cic _de off_ I §§ 41, 150, passages in which the growth of the
technical sense is seen.

[888] See the interesting story of the bee-farm in Varro _RR_ III 16 §§
10, 11.

[889] Pliny _NH_ XIX §§ 50-1.

[890] II 412-3 _laudato ingentia rura, exiguum colito_. Not found in
surviving text of Cato.

[891] II 532.

[892] I 125-8, II 336-42.

[893] II 136-76.

[894] Dionys _Hal_ I 36-7, Strabo VI 4 § 1, p 286, Varro _RR_ I 2 §§ 1-7.

[895] Horace _Odes_ IV 5, 15, published about 14 BC. So Martial V 4
declares that Domitian has made Rome _pudica_.

[896] Sueton _Aug_ 32 (cf _Tib_ 8), and the elder Seneca _contr_ X 4
§ 18. Even in the second century AD, Spart _Hadr_ 18 § 9 _ergastula
servorum et liberorum tulit_. Perhaps the _ergastula_ in Columella I 3 §
12 refer to the same practice.

[897] H Blümner in Müller’s _Handbuch_ IV 2 2 p 543 says that Varro
does not refer to the _Kolonat als Pacht_. But that sense seems clearly
implied in I 2 § 17, II 3 § 4 _in lege locationis fundi_. In I 16 § 4 it
surely includes tenants, even if the application is more general. In II
_praef_ § 5 _colonus_ is simply = _arator_, opposed to _pastor_.

[898] Columella I 7.

[899] Pliny _epist_ III 19, IX 37.

[900] This reminds us of Varro’s words, speaking (I 17 § 2) of free
workers ... _cum ipsi colunt, ut plerique pauperculi cum sua progenie_.

[901] Cf Tibullus II 1 23 _turbaque vernarum saturi bona signa coloni_.

[902] See above, p 216.

[903] Hor _epist_ I 14 39, cf II 2 184-6.

[904] Hor _Sat_ I 3 99 foll, where _animalia_ seems to mean little more
than _homines_.

[905] Hor _Sat_ II 6 55-6, _Odes_ III 4 37-40.

[906] The one reference to the assignations [_G_ II 198] only speaks of
the misfortune of Mantua, not of his own.

[907] Hor _Epist_ I 16 69-72.

[908] Hor _Sat_ I 1 28, 32.

[909] For the story of the φιάλη (freedman’s offering) sent yearly
by Maecenas to Augustus as a recognition of his restoration of Roman
freedom, see Gardthausen _Augustus_ VII 7 and notes.

[910] _Monum Ancyr_ ed Mommsen, I 16-9, III 22-8.

[911] Tacitus _ann_ XIV 53.

[912] Gardthausen _Augustus_ VII 7, pp 768-9. He quotes Schol ad Juvenal
V 3 (Maecenas) _ad quem sectio bonorum Favoni pertinuerat_.

[913] Varro _RR_ I 17, a notable chapter.

[914] Livy VI 12, VII 25.

[915] Plin _NH_ XXXVII §§ 201-3.

[916] _Augustus_ VI 3, p 547.

[917] Macrob _Sat_ I 11 § 22.

[918] Dion Cass XLVIII 6 § 3.

[919] The words of Donatus (after Suetonius) in his life of Vergil.
Reifferscheid’s Suetonius p 59.

[920] Keightley (1846) says the same.

[921] With much respect and regret, I cannot accept the views of Prof
Conway in his inaugural lecture of 1903.

[922] The absence of reference to Cicero has of course been noted. But
this was general in the Augustan age.

[923] Seneca _epist_ 86 § 15.

[924] Seneca _controversiae_ II 1 § 26.

[925] Seneca _excerpt contr_ V 5

[926] Compare the reference to unruly _servorum agmina_ in Calabria, Tac
_ann_ XII 65, in the time of Claudius.

[927] Seneca _excerpt contr_ VI 2.

[928] Seneca _contr_ II 1 § 5.

[929] Seneca _contr_ VII 6 § 18.

[930] Seneca _contr_ X 4 § 18 _solitudines suas isti beati ingenuorum
ergastulis excolunt_. See above p 233 and below on Columella p 263.

[931] Seneca _contr_ VII 6 § 17, cf Plut _Cat mai_ 24.

[932] Val Max IV 4 § 6.

[933] Val Max IV 3 § 5, cf 4 § 7, 8 § 1.

[934] Val Max VII 5 § 2.

[935] Phaedr IV 5, II 8.

[936] Such as Polybius the influential freedman of Claudius, to whom
Seneca addressed a _consolatio_.

[937] _Epist_ 77 § 7 is a notable passage.

[938] Cf _de benef_ III 26.

[939] As by the younger Pliny _paneg_ 42 on Trajan.

[940] _de benef_ V 18 § 2, 19 § 1, VII 4 § 4.

[941] _de clement_ I 18, _nat quaest_ I 16 § 1.

[942] _de benef_ III 22 § 1, cf Athenaeus 276 b.

[943] _de benef_ V 19 § 9, _epist_ 12 § 3.

[944] _de constant_ (ad Serenum) 5 § 1.

[945] _epist_ 47 § 14.

[946] _epist_ 90 § 27, _artificem vides vitae_ etc.

[947] _epist_ 65 § 6.

[948] _epist_ 88 § 21. The contrast of _liberalis_ and _sordidus_ often
occurs.

[949] _epist_ 90 § 15.

[950] _epist_ 44 § 3 _aquam traxit et rigando horto locavit manus_.

[951] _epist_ 114 § 26 _quot millia colonorum arent fodiant_ ... etc.

[952] _epist_ 123 § 2 _non habet panem meus pistor: sed habet vilicus,
sed habet atriensis, sed habet colonus_. _atriensis_ = head of domestics,
porter or butler.

[953] _de benef_ VI 4 § 4 _colonum suum non tenet, quamvis tabellis
manentibus, qui segetem eius proculcavit, qui succidit arbusta, non quia
recepit quod pepigerat sed quia ne reciperet effecit. Sic debitori suo
creditor saepe damnatur, ubi plus ex alia causa abstulit quam ex crediti
petit._

[954] The _pactum_ implied in _pepigerat_.

[955] _de benef_ VII 5 §§ 2, 3, _conduxi domum a te; in hac aliquid
tuum est, aliquid meum; res tua est, usus rei tuae meus est. itaque
nec fructus tanges colono tuo prohibente, quamvis in tua possessione
nascantur ... nec conductum meum, quamquam sis dominus, intrabis, nec
servum tuum, mercennarium meum, abduces_ ... etc. See the chapter on the
Jurists of the Digest.

[956] _epist_ 90 § 39 _licet itaque nunc conetur reparare quod perdidit,
licet agros agris adiciat vicinum vel pretio pellens vel iniuria, licet
in provinciarum spatium rura dilatet et possessionem vocet per sua longam
peregrinationem_ ... etc. For _iniuria_ cf Columella I 3 §§ 6, 7. The
violent expulsion of poor farmers by the rich is an old topic. Cf Sallust
_Iug_ 41 § 8, Appian _civ_ I 7 § 5 and see index.

[957] _epist_ 87 § 7 _quia in omnibus provinciis arat ... quia tantum
suburbani agri possidet quantum invidiose in desertis Apuliae possideret_.

[958] _de ira_ III 29 § 1.

[959] Lucan VII 387-439.

[960] _vincto fossore coluntur Hesperiae vegetes._

[961] I 158-82.

[962] _longa sub ignotis extendere rura colonis._ Cf Seneca _de vita
beata_ 17 § 2 _cur trans mare possides? cur plura quam nosti?_ and Petron
37.

[963] VI 152 _o famuli turpes, servum pecus_.

[964] Calpurn _ecl_ IV 118.

[965] Petron § 37 _fundos habet qua milvi volant_. A proverbial phrase,
cf Persius IV 26 _dives arat ... quantum non milvus oberret_, Juvenal IX
55.

[966] Petron § 53.

[967] _edicta aedilium._

[968] _saltuariorum testamenta._ They were evidently slaves and could
only make wills by leave of their owner. See Dig XXXIII 7 § 12⁴.

[969] Many times referred to in the book.

[970] I 3 §§ 8-13.

[971] Cf Plin _epist_ III 19 § 2 _pulchritudo iungendi_, and Mayor’s
note. Petron § 77.

[972] I 3 §§ 6, 7, where he even refers to a very disobliging neighbour
of his own estate.

[973] I 1 § 20 _longinqua ne dicam transmarina rura_ ... etc.

[974] I _praef_ §§ 13-15, XII _praef_ §§ 8-10.

[975] I _praef_ § 12.

[976] I 7 _passim_.

[977] If we are to hold that _opus_ here refers only to work on the
particular farm hired by the tenant, I presume it includes improvements,
as in Digest XIX 2 § 24³.

[978] _remissionem petere non audet._

[979] _felicissimum fundum esse qui colonos indigenas haberet et tamquam
in paterna possessione natos iam inde a cunabulis longa familiaritate
retineret._

[980] _urbanum colonum, qui per familiam mavult agrum quam per se colere._

[981] _rusticos et eosdem adsiduos colonos._

[982] _in his regionibus quae gravitate caeli solique sterilitate
vastantur._ Cf I 5 § 5, _gravibus_, and Varro I 17 § 2.

[983] By H. Blümner in Müller’s _Handbuch_. So also Gummerus in _Klio_
1906 pp 85-6.

[984] _domini praesentia cariturum._

[985] Dig XXXIII 7 § 25¹, XIX 2 § 24, § 25³.

[986] M Weber _Röm Agrargeschichte_ p 244. Of course _opus_ is a
general term, not technical as _operae_ (= labour units) often is. See
Vinogradoff _Growth of the Manor_ note 94 on p 110. From Horace _epist_ I
1 21 _opus debentibus_ I can get no help.

[987] See below, in the chapter on the African inscriptions.

[988] Caesar _civ_ I 34, 56.

[989] Wallon, _Esclavage_ II 99, 100, refers to the long leasing of
municipal estates, held in virtual perpetuity so long as the rent was
paid. He cites Gaius III 145. So too estates of temples, and later of the
_fiscus_.

[990] Wallon II 120, cf Digest XXXIII 7 § 19, an opinion of Paulus. It
seems to be a sort of _métayer_ system. See index.

[991] But such as the _imbecilli cultores_ of Plin _epist_ III 19 § 6.

[992] See case referred to by Paulus in Digest XXXI § 86¹.

[993] I _praef_ § 12 _ex mercennariis aliquem_. In II 2 § 12 _operarum
vilitas_, and IV 6 § 3 _operarum paenuria_, III 21 § 10 _plures operas
quantocumque pretio conducere_, the hands hired may be slaves.

[994] Of course not necessarily agricultural, in fact generally not.
See my article in _Journal of Roman Studies_ 1918, and Index under
_Emigration_.

[995] Very different from the small farmers of old time, who were owners.

[996] See for instance Digest XXXIII 7 § 18⁴, and § 20¹, opinions of
Scaevola.

[997] I 8 and XI 1.

[998] I 8 §§ 1-3, XI 1 §§ 3, 4, 7.

[999] I 8 §§ 3, 4, where he says that a man who learns how to do
things _ab subiecto_ is not fitted _opus exigere_. XI 1 §§ 9-13 is not
inconsistent with this, but lays more stress on the necessity of training
the _vilicus_.

[1000] I 8 § 5 _contubernalis mulier_. She is to be _vilica_, cf XII 1 §§
1, 2. Apuleius _met_ VIII 22.

[1001] _eidemque actori_ = him in his capacity of _actor_. Cf XI 1 §§ 13,
19. See Index, _actor_.

[1002] I 8 §§ 6, 7, XI 1 §§ 22-3.

[1003] _nisi ut addiscat aliquam culturam._ He is in a sense _colonus_,
and hence his sphere of duty is called _colonia_ in XI 1 § 23. In I 4 §§
4, 5 the value of experiments is recognized.

[1004] I 8 § 8, XI 1 §§ 20-1.

[1005] I 8 § 9, XI 1 § 21.

[1006] I 8 § 10 _animi, quantum servile patitur ingenium, virtutibus
instructus_.

[1007] I 8 § 10, XI 1 § 25.

[1008] I 8 § 11 _operis exactio, ut iusta reddantur, ut vilicus semper se
repraesentet_, XI 1 §§ 25-6.

[1009] _magistri singulorum officiorum_, XI 1 § 27.

[1010] I 8 § 12, XI 1 § 23.

[1011] I 8 § 13, XI 1 § 24.

[1012] I 8 §§ 13-4, XI 1 §§ 27-30.

[1013] In XI 1 §§ 4 foll this notion is, with citation of Xenophon,
repudiated, and the need of training a steward emphasized.

[1014] In XI 1 § 4 he cites a saying of Cato, _male agitur cum domino
quem vilicus docet_.

[1015] I 8 § 15.

[1016] I 8 § 16 _ut ergastuli mancipia recognoscant_ ... etc. In XI 1 §
22 this appears as part of the steward’s daily duty.

[1017] I 8 §§ 17-8 _quanto et pluribus subiecti, ut vilicis ut operum
magistris ut ergastulariis, magis obnoxii perpetiendis iniuriis, et
rursus saevitia atque avaritia laesi magis timendi sunt_.

[1018] _an ex sua constitutione iusta percipiant._ _sua_ = the scale
allowed by himself as _dominus_.

[1019] I 8 § 19.

[1020] _multum confert augendo patrimonio._

[1021] I 9 §§ 1-6. Cf XI 1 §§ 8, 9.

[1022] _mediastinus._

[1023] Cf Dig XXXIII 7 § 8 pr.

[1024] _vineta plurimum per alligatos excoluntur._

[1025] _ne confundantur opera familiae, sic ut omnes omnia exequantur._

[1026] I 9 §§ 7, 8.

[1027] VI 2 § 15 _pecoris operarii_ (the very word also used = labourer),
3 § 3 _iumentis iusta operum reddentibus_.

[1028] XI 1 § 18 _more optimi pastoris ... idem quod ille diligens
opilio_.

[1029] _valetudinarium_ XI 1 § 18, XII 1 § 6, 3 §§ 7, 8.

[1030] IV 3 § 1 _quosdam emacitas in armentis, quosdam exercet in
comparandis mancipiis; de tuendis nulla cura tangit_. Cf I 4 § 7.

[1031] XII 3 especially §§ 1, 8, cf _praef_ § 9. He refers to Xenophon.

[1032] VIII 11 § 2 _tamquam servitio liberatae_, also 12 and 15 § 7
_parere cunctantur in servitute_.

[1033] I 6 § 3 _vinctis quam saluberrimum subterraneum ergastulum,
plurimis idque angustis illustratum fenestris atque a terra sic editis ne
manu contingi possint_. Cf XI 1 §§ 22.

[1034] I 6 § 19 _rusticis balneis_.

[1035] I 3 § 12 [our land-grabbers scorn moderation and buy up _fines
gentium_ so vast that they cannot even ride round them] _sed proculcandos
pecudibus et vastandos feris derelinquunt, aut occupatos nexu civium et
ergastulis tenent_. Schneider explains _nexu_ etc as = _civibus ob aes
alienum nexis_. Surely at this date it cannot be used in the strictly
technical sense. See p 269.

[1036] Like the _obaerarii_ or _obaerati_ of Varro I 17 § 2. See on that
passage p 180.

[1037] _suppressio._ See Index.

[1038] VIII 2 § 7 _anus sedula_ may serve as _custos vagantium_.

[1039] VI _praef_ § 4.

[1040] I 8 § 5, 7 § 7, but in XII 3 § 6 for instance _actores_ are not =
_vilici_. Schneider.

[1041] See Cic _de oratore_ I § 249, _pro Tullio_ § 17.

[1042] I 6 § 23.

[1043] I 6 § 7 _procuratori supra ianuam ob easdem causas: et is tamen
vilicum observet ex vicino_. Cf Plin _epist_ III 19 § 2.

[1044] In Columella’s time. At a later date this could hardly be said, as
the position of _coloni_ became worse.

[1045] III 13 §§ 12, 13. Cf Dig XLIII 24 § 15¹.

[1046] A good instance in Pliny _NH_ XIV 49, 50.

[1047] III 21 § 10 (of hurry resulting from want of forethought)
_cogitque plures operas quantocumque pretio conducere_.

[1048] III 3 § 8.

[1049] I _praef_ §§ 1, 2, II 1. Cf III 3 § 4 with Varro I 44 § 1.

[1050] I 3 § 9 _nec dubium quin mimis reddat laxus ager non recte cultus
quam angustus eximie_, IV 3 § 6.

[1051] For milk-delivery see Calpurnius _ecl_ IV 25-6 _et lac venale per
urbem non tacitus porta_. For cheese Verg _G_ III 402.

[1052] VI _praef_ §§ 3-5.

[1053] Also bee-keeping.

[1054] VIII 10 §§ 3, 4.

[1055] _quia nec parvo conducuntur qui mandant_ ... etc.

[1056] II 9 §§ 14, 16.

[1057] _siligo_, II 6 § 2, 9 § 13.

[1058] I 6 §§ 9-17.

[1059] II 20 § 6 _frumenta, si in annos reconduntur, ... sin protinus
usui destinantur_ ... etc.

[1060] I 2 § 3.

[1061] As Plutarch _C Gracc_ 7 says εὐθεῖαι γὰρ ἤγοντο διὰ τῶν χωρίων
ἀτρεμεῖs.

[1062] I 5 §§ 6, 7.

[1063] I 3 §§ 3, 4.

[1064] II 13 § 7 _consummatio operarum_.

[1065] II 21 § 10.

[1066] I _praef_ § 12, XI 1 § 12.

[1067] I _praef_ § 17 (of the non-urban population in old times) _qui
rura colerent administrarentve opera colonorum_. The last three words are
not in some MSS.

[1068] I 4 § 4, Verg _G_ I 51-3.

[1069] So the Greeks often refer to Homer as The Poet.

[1070] _verissimo vati velut oraculo._

[1071] Verg _G_ IV 116 foll.

[1072] Quintil X 1 §§ 46-131, especially §§ 85-6.

[1073] See Tacitus _Germ_ 41 on the exceptionally favourable treatment of
the Hermunduri, with Schweitzer-Sidler’s notes.

[1074] Seneca _ad Helviam_ 7 § 7 refers to the colonies sent out to the
provinces in earlier times, and is rhetorically exaggerated.

[1075] Cf Nissen _Italische Landeskunde_ vol II pp 128-30.

[1076] A notable utterance on this topic is Seneca _ad Helviam_ 6 §§ 2,
3. See Mayor’s notes on Juvenal III 58 foll.

[1077] See Tacitus _Germ_ 29 for interesting matter bearing on these
points.

[1078] The numerous references need not be given here. They can be found
in H. Schiller’s _Geschichte der Römischen Kaiserzeit_.

[1079] Schiller I 515, 534. See Hyginus gromat I p 133, Frontinus _ibid_
pp 53-4, and the rescript of Domitian in Girard, _textes_ part I ch 4 §
5. Suetonius _Dom_ 9.

[1080] Domitian also made ordinances forbidding new vineyards in Italy
and enjoining the destruction of those in the Provinces. But these were
not carried out. Schiller I 533. Suet _Dom_ 7, 14, Stat _silv_ IV 3 11-12.

[1081] Schiller I 540.

[1082] Plin _paneg_ 26-8.

[1083] Schiller I 566, 623, 630, 656.

[1084] Schiller I 566.

[1085] Capitolinus _M Aurel_ II § 7. The text is in some doubt.

[1086] Schiller I 651.

[1087] Schiller I 566. Plin _epist_ VI 19 depicts the situation fully.
The aim was to make them feel Italy their _patria_. See the jealousy of
rich Provincials shewn by senators, Tac _Ann_ XI 23.

[1088] Schiller I 656.

[1089] The remarkable community of Lamasba is referred to below in a note
after chapter XXXVII.

[1090] The _locus classicus_ on emigrant Romans is Cic _pro Fonteio_ §§
11-13, which belongs to 69 BC. Cf Sallust _Iug_ 21, 26, 47.

[1091] That is, allottees of land distributed _viritim_.

[1092] Inscription, Dessau 1334, CIL VIII 15454.

[1093] Dessau 6790.

[1094] [Victor] _de viris illustribus_ 73 § 1, cf § 5.

[1095] Cf Appian _civ_ I 29 § 2.

[1096] _Bellum Afr_ 32, 35, 56, Dion Cass XLIII 4 § 2.

[1097] For details of his life see Mayor on Pliny _epp_ III 11. Cf Ritter
and Preller _hist Philos_, Champagny _Les Césars_ IV 1 § 1.

[1098] Preserved by Stobaeus _flor_ LVI 18. It is in Greek, the classic
language of Philosophy, as the _Meditations_ of Marcus Aurelius, etc.

[1099] πόρος, a means of livelihood.

[1100] ἢ δημοσίαν ἢ ἰδιωτικήν.

[1101] αὐτουργικοὶ καὶ φιλόπονοι ὄντες.

[1102] εἴ γε μὴν ἅμα φιλοσοφεῖ τις καὶ γεωργεῖ.

[1103] τοῦ καθῆσθαι ἐν πόλει τὸ ζῆν ἐν χωρίῳ.

[1104] σύν γε τῷ καλοκαγαθίας μὴ ὀλιγωρεῖν.

[1105] These are stock instances of happiness in rustic life. For
references see notes in Frazer’s _Pausanias_ VIII 24 § 13, X 24 § 1.

[1106] σοφιστάς.

[1107] χαλεπώτατον.

[1108] He was in command of the fleet at Misenum in 79 AD when the
great eruption of Vesuvius took place. He persisted in approaching it,
and met his death. The family belonged to the colony of Novum Comum in
Transpadane Gaul, now part of Italy.

[1109] _NH_ XVIII 1-5.

[1110] _NH_ XVIII 7, 18, 20.

[1111] _NH_ XVIII 19, 21, 36.

[1112] _NH_ XVIII 35.

[1113] _NH_ XVIII 27-8.

[1114] _NH_ XVIII 32.

[1115] _NH_ XVIII 35.

[1116] _NH_ VIII 180. In Aelian _var hist_ this is recorded (V 14) as an
old rule in Attica.

[1117] _NH_ XVIII 36.

[1118] _NH_ XIX 60 _octo iugerum operis palari iustum est_ is a good
instance. This verb _palare_ = to dig should be added to dictionaries.

[1119] _NH_ XVIII 37-8.

[1120] _agros ... coemendo colendoque in gloriam._

[1121] So Tiberius in Tac _ann_ III 54.

[1122] Tac _hist_ III 8 _Aegyptus, claustra annonae_.

[1123] _NH_ XVIII 15 foll.

[1124] _ibid_ 17 _nec e latifundiis singulorum contingebat arcentium
vicinos_.

[1125] _NH_ XVIII 24.

[1126] _NH_ XIX 50-1.

[1127] _NH_ XVIII 12.

[1128] _NH_ XVIII 11, 26.

[1129] _NH_ XIV 49, 50.

[1130] _NH_ XIV 48.

[1131] Such as the _agricola strenuus_ depicted in the letter of Marcus
to Fronto (p 29 Naber), who has _omnia ad usum magis quam ad voluptatem_.

[1132] _NH_ XVIII 273-4. Aristotle _Politics_ I 11.

[1133] _NH_ XVIII 174.

[1134] _NH_ XVIII 178 ... _transverso monte_.

[1135] _certe sine hoc animali montanae gentes sarculis arant._

[1136] _NH_ XXXIII 26-7.

[1137] _aliter apud antiquos singuli Marcipores Luciporesve dominorum
gentiles omnem victum in promiscuo habebant._

[1138] _NH_ XVIII 36 _coli rura ab ergastulis pessimum est, et quicquid
agitur a desperantibus_.

[1139] _NH_ XXXVII 201-3.

[1140] _principatum naturae optinet ... viris feminis ducibus militibus
servitiis_ ... etc.

[1141] _servorum exercitio._

[1142] _NH_ XVIII 11.

[1143] _NH_ VIII 180 _tamquam colono suo interempto_.

[1144] _NH_ XVIII 167 _coloni vice fungens_.

[1145] _NH_ XVIII 38 _praeterquam subole suo colono aut pascendis alioqui
colente domino aliquas messis colligere non expedit, si computetur
impendium operae_.

[1146] In _NH_ XVIII 120 he cites Vergil as giving a piece of advice
based on the usage of the Po country. Pliny as a Transpadane may have
been prejudiced in Vergil’s favour and possibly jealous of the Spanish
Columella.

[1147] In _NH_ XVIII 170 he cites Verg _G_ I 53, calling it _oraculum
illud_, but with a textual slip.

[1148] _NH_ XVIII 70.

[1149] The passing mention in _Annals_ XVI 13 of the great mortality
among the _servitia_ and _ingenua plebes_ in the plague of 65 AD is a
good specimen. The two classes are often thus spoken of together. Cf
Sueton _Claud_ 22, _Nero_ 22.

[1150] _Annals_ III 54.

[1151] This policy bore fruit in the possibility of forming reserves in
the next period. See Spart _Severus_ 8 § 5, 23 § 2.

[1152] _Annals_ IV 27.

[1153] _Annals_ IV 6 _infecunditati terrarum_.

[1154] _Annals_ VI 16, 17. Caesar’s law is described as _de modo credendi
possidendique intra Italiam_. Nipperdey holds that it cannot be the law
of BC 49, but must be an unknown law, not of temporary effect. See his
note.

[1155] Nipperdey’s restoration of this sentence with the help of Suet
_Tib_ 48 seems to me quite certain.

[1156] _si debitor populo in duplum praediis cavisset._ The precedent of
Augustus is mentioned in Sueton _Aug_ 41.

[1157] See Cicero _in Catil_ II § 18.

[1158] See the case of Sittius in Cic _pro Sulla_ §§ 56-9. Such financial
opportunities were evidently few in the later Empire.

[1159] _trepidique patres_ (_neque enim quisquam tali culpa vacuus_) ...
etc.

[1160] _Germ_ 26.

[1161] See Schweitzer-Sidler’s notes, and cf the remarks of Caesar _BG_
IV 1, VI 22.

[1162] See Pliny _NH_ XVIII 259 and Conington’s notes on Verg _G_ I
71-83. Varro I 44 § 3.

[1163] _Germ_ 24.

[1164] _servos condicionis huius per commercia tradunt, ut se quoque
pudore victoriae exsolvant._

[1165] _Germ_ 25 _frumenti modum dominus aut pecoris aut vestis ut colono
iniungit, et servus hactenus paret_. The _colonus_ here is clearly a
tenant, his German analogue a serf.

[1166] _Agricola_ 28.

[1167] _per commercia venumdatos et in nostram usque ripam mutatione
ementium adductos._

[1168] CIL VIII 18587, Ephem epigr VII 788, where it is annotated by
Mommsen and others.

[1169] Mentioned in two routes of the _Itinerarium Antoninum_.

[1170] Cf Gaius II 7, 21, and below, note on p 351.

[1171] Cf Digest VIII 6 § 7, XLIII 20 §§ 2, 5.

[1172] See Marquardt _Stvw_ 1, index under _Lamasba_.

[1173] Were they perhaps _veterani_? That there were a number of these
settled in Africa is attested by Cod Th XI 1 § 28 (400), cf XII 1 § 45
(358).

[1174] Written 97 AD, under Nerva.

[1175] _de aquis_ 75. Formerly this offence was punished by confiscating
the land so watered, _ibid_ 97.

[1176] _de aquis_ 6.

[1177] _de aquis_ 9.

[1178] _de aquis_ 107-10. But according to Digest XLIII 20 § 1³⁹⁻⁴³
(Ulpian) the grant was sometimes not _personis_ but _praediis_, and so
perpetual.

[1179] _de aquis_ 105, 116-8.

[1180] _de aquis_ 120, 124-8.

[1181] _impotentia possessorum._

[1182] _holitores_ as in Horace _epist_ I 18 36. Later called _hortulani_
as in Apuleius _metam_ IX 31-2, 39-42. Girard, _textes_ part III ch 4
§ 1 e, gives an interesting case of a _colonus hortorum olitoriorum_
between Rome and Ostia, belonging to a _collegium_. The man is probably a
freedman.

[1183] _de aquis_ 112-5.

[1184] _de aquis_ 11, cf also 92.

[1185] Wilmanns _exempla_ 2844-8.

[1186] _Hermes_ XIX pp 393-416.

[1187] Plin _epist_ VII 18.

[1188] Mommsen _op cit_ p 410. See index under _instrumentum_.

[1189] Whether we have in Columella a direct reference to this method
is a question I have discussed in the chapter on that author. However
answered, it does not affect the present passage. See the chapter on the
African inscriptions.

[1190] See the case cited in the chapter on Pliny the younger.

[1191] By H Blümner in Müller’s _Handbuch_ ed 3, IV ii 2 p 544.

[1192] Mommsen _op cit_ p 416. See the chapter on evidence from the
Digest.

[1193] Mommsen _op cit_ p 412.

[1194] Digest XXXIII 7 § 20¹ _non fide dominica sed mercede_. _ibid_ §
12³ _qui quasi colonus in agro erat_.

[1195] Dig XXXIII 7 § 20³ _praedia ut instructa sunt cum dotibus et
reliquis colonorum et vilicorum et mancipiis et pecore omni legavit et
peculiis et cum actore_. Cf also XL 7 § 40⁵.

[1196] Dig XXXIII 7 § 20⁴.

[1197] But that _uxor_ was sometimes loosely used of a slave’s
_contubernalis_ is true. Wallon II 207, cf Paulus _Sent_ III 6 §§ 38, 40,
Dig XXXIII 7 § 12⁷,³³.

[1198] Mommsen _op cit_ p 409.

[1199] Columella I 9 § 4.

[1200] Plut _de defectu oraculorum_ 8.

[1201] oratio VII, _Euboicus seu venator_.

[1202] A contemporary of the younger Pliny, flourished about 100 AD.

[1203] I think Nero is meant here.

[1204] Mahaffy, _Silver Age_ p 329, thinks Carystos is meant, though it
might be Chalcis.

[1205] ἀφορμῆς. This passage seems openly to recognize the ruinous
competition of slave labour under capitalists, which the single artisan
was unable to face. The admission is so far as I know very rare in
ancient writers. That Dion’s mind was greatly exercised on the subject of
slavery in general, is shewn by Orations X, XIV, XV, and many scattered
references elsewhere.

[1206] See the chapter on Musonius.

[1207] As in Archbishop Trench’s charming _Lectures on Plutarch_ pp 10,
77 foll.

[1208] Matt 21 §§ 28-30. I cannot feel sure of this general inference.

[1209] Matt 21 §§ 33-41, Mar 12 §§ 1-9, Luk 20 §§ 9-16.

[1210] I Cor 9 §§ 7-10, I Tim 5 § 18, II Tim 2 § 6.

[1211] Luk 12 §§ 16-9, etc.

[1212] οἰκονόμος, Luk 12 §§ 42-8, 16 §§ 1-12, I Cor 4 § 2.

[1213] [Aristotle] _Econ_ 1 5 § 3 δούλῳ δὲ μισθὸς τροφή.

[1214] James 5 § 4.

[1215] Rom 4 § 4.

[1216] Matt 20 §§ 1-16. Abp Trench, _Notes on the Parables_, has cleared
away a mass of perverse interpretations.

[1217] Matt 6 § 12, Luk 7 § 41, 16 § 5.

[1218] Matt 25 §§ 14-30, Luk 19 §§ 12-26.

[1219] Acts 1 § 18, 4 §§ 34-7.

[1220] Often referred to. See Friedländer’s index under _Nomentanus_, and
cf VIII 61, IX 18, 97.

[1221] I 55, X 48.

[1222] III 47 etc. Cf VII 31, XII 72.

[1223] II 11 _nihil colonus vilicusque decoxit_. This may imply that the
_vilicus_ was a _servus quasi colonus_ liable to a rent and in arrears.
See notes pp 299, 311. But I do not venture to draw this inference.

[1224] VII 31.

[1225] X 87. Cf Juv IV 25-6, Digest XXXII § 99, XXXIII 7 § 12¹²,¹³, etc.

[1226] XII 59.

[1227] IV 66.

[1228] VI 73, X 92.

[1229] IX 2 _haud sua desertus rura sodalis arat_.

[1230] XII 57.

[1231] V 35, X 14, etc.

[1232] Plin _NH_ XVIII § 35.

[1233] IX 35.

[1234] See Juv XIV 267-302 on the risks faced by speculators in sea-borne
commerce.

[1235] III 58.

[1236] III 47.

[1237] _dona matrum_ ‘presents from their mothers.’ Eggs, I think. Cf VII
31 and Juv XI 70-1. The conjecture _ova matrum_ (Paley) is good.

[1238] The story of the Usipian deserters who found their way back into
Roman hands by way of the slave-market is a curious episode of 83 AD. Tac
_Agr_ 28. See the chapter on Tacitus.

[1239] VII 80.

[1240] X 30, of a charming seaside _villa_ at Formiae. _o ianitores
vilicique felices, dominis parantur ista, serviunt vobis._ In Dig XXXIII
7 § 15² we hear of _mulier villae custos perpetua_.

[1241] The note of Mommsen, _Hermes_ XIX 412, deals with the case of
_servi quasi coloni_ farming parcels of land, recognized in the writings
of jurists. It seems that they farmed either at their own risk or for
owner’s account [_fide dominica_]. In the former case they could have a
tenant’s agreement like the free _coloni_. In the latter they were only
_vilici_ and therefore part of the _instrumentum_. Here I think we may
see beginnings of the unfree colonate. But Mommsen does not touch the
point of manumission. It seems to me that an agreement with a slave must
at first have been revocable at the pleasure of the _dominus_, and its
growth into a binding lease was probably connected in many instances with
manumission.

[1242] I 55 _hoc petit, esse sui nec magni ruris arator, sordidaque in
parvis otia rebus amat_. And often.

[1243] VII 36, XI 34.

[1244] I 85, X 85. Cf Pliny _epist_ VIII 17.

[1245] X 61, XI 48. The title _de sepulchro violato_, Dig XLVII 12, will
illustrate this.

[1246] The form HNS (_heredem non sequitur_) is common in sepulchral
inscriptions.

[1247] X 92.

[1248] Juv XIV 161-71.

[1249] XI 86-9.

[1250] XIV 179-81.

[1251] XIV 159-63.

[1252] II 73-4.

[1253] XIV 70-2.

[1254] VIII 245 foll. For the error in this tradition see Madvig, _kleine
philologische Schriften_ No 10.

[1255] III 223-9.

[1256] VI 287-95, cf XI 77-131.

[1257] XVI 32-4. See Hardy on Plin _epist_ X 86 B, Shuckburgh on Sueton
_Aug_ 27, Tac _hist_ III 24 _vos, nisi vincitis, pagani_. This use is
common in the Digest.

[1258] VI 1-18, XV 147-58.

[1259] X 356-66.

[1260] VII 188-9, IX 54-5, etc.

[1261] IX 59-62.

[1262] VII 188-9, case of Quintilian.

[1263] XIV 86-95, 140 foll, 274-5. Cf X 225-6 etc.

[1264] XIV 140-55, XVI 36-9. Cf Seneca _epist_ 90 § 39.

[1265] XI 151 foll.

[1266] VI 149-52, IX 59-62.

[1267] I 107-8.

[1268] X 356.

[1269] III 223-9, _bidentis amans_.

[1270] Mart XIV 49 _exercet melius vinea fossa viros_.

[1271] See his use of _ingenuus_ = not fit for hard work, III 46, X 47,
following Ovid, and cf the lines to a slave IX 92.

[1272] Juv XI 77-81.

[1273] See _epist_ IV 10, VII 16, 32, VIII 16.

[1274] Cf Martial I 101, VI 29.

[1275] An important limitation, on which see Wallon III 55.

[1276] VII 11, 14.

[1277] VI 3.

[1278] VI 19.

[1279] _si paenitet te Italicorum praediorum._

[1280] III 19.

[1281] _sub eodem procuratore ac paene isdem actoribus habere._ The
_actores_ seem to be = _vilici_, under the newer name. _procurator_ a
much more important person. See _paneg_ 36 for the two as grades in the
imperial private service. Cf chapter on Columella p 264.

[1282] _atriensium, topiariorum, fabrorum, atque etiam venatorii
instrumenti._

[1283] _sed haec felicitas terrae inbecillis cultoribus fatigatur._ No
doubt lack of sufficient capital is meant.

[1284] See Digest XX 2 §§ 4, 7, for _pignora_ on farms.

[1285] _reliqua colonorum._

[1286] _sunt ergo instruendi eo pluris quod frugi mancipiis: nam nec ipse
usquam vinctos habeo nec ibi quisquam._ I take _instruendi_ as referring
to _agri_ just above. The slaves are a normal part of _instrumentum
fundi_.

[1287] _hac paenuria colonorum._ Not the tenants’ poverty. Cf VII 30 § 3.

[1288] _sum quidem prope totus in praediis._

[1289] Daubeny, _Lectures_ p 147, regards this great variation as normal
in modern experience, and vineyards as the least lucrative kind of
husbandry.

[1290] VIII 15, IX 28, IV 6, X 8 § 5.

[1291] II 4 § 3.

[1292] _querellae rusticorum_, V 14 § 8, VII 30 § 3, IX 36 § 6.

[1293] _remissiones_, IX 37 § 2, X 8 § 5.

[1294] As de Coulanges remarks pp 17-8, Pliny does not propose to get rid
of them, but to keep them as partiary tenants. They would be in his debt.
He uses the expression _aeris alieni_ IX 37 § 2. He would have to find
_instrumentum_ for them.

[1295] IX 20 § 2.

[1296] IX 16.

[1297] IX 20 § 2 _obrepere urbanis qui nunc rusticis praesunt_.

[1298] IX 37.

[1299] _necessitas locandorum praediorum plures annos ordinatura._

[1300] _priore lustro._ The _lustrum_ or _quinquennium_ was the common
term of leases, and recognized in law books. Cf Digest XII 1 § 4¹, XIX 2
§ 24, etc.

[1301] _ut qui iam putent se non sibi parcere._

[1302] _si non nummo sed partibus locem, ac deinde ex meis aliquos operis
exactores custodes fructibus ponam._ His new tenants would be _coloni
partiarii_.

[1303] VIII 2.

[1304] V 6 § 12.

[1305] VIII 17.

[1306] VI 25.

[1307] _interceptusne sit a suis an cum suis dubium._

[1308] Cf Juvenal X 19-22.

[1309] Fronto, when appointed to govern Asia, one of the most peaceful
Provinces, at once looked out for a military officer to deal with
_latrones_. Fronto p 169 Naber.

[1310] Paul _Ephes_ 6 §§ 5 foll, _Coloss_ 3 §§ 22 foll, I Pet 2 §§ 18
foll.

[1311] X 29, 30, with Hardy’s notes.

[1312] The first reference to a practice that was common later.

[1313] _cum haberent condicionis suae conscientiam._

[1314] On the other hand we hear of free citizens trying to shirk army
service earlier than this. Cf Sueton _Aug_ 24, _Tib_ 8.

[1315] Capitolinus _Marcus_ 21 §§ 6, 7.

[1316] VII 18.

[1317] _actori publico mancipavi._ See chapter on the _alimenta_ of
Trajan’s time. References to municipal benefactions are very numerous in
the Digest.

[1318] As we have seen above, the tenant _coloni_ employed slave labour.
Whether they worked with their own hands, or confined themselves to
direction, probably varied in various cases.

[1319] Sueton _Julius_ 26, 28.

[1320] _Aug_ 21 _sub lege ... ne in vicina regione servirent neve intra
tricesimum annum liberarentur_. See Shuckburgh’s note.

[1321] _Aug_ 32, _Tiber_ 8.

[1322] _Aug_ 16.

[1323] _Aug_ 24.

[1324] _Aug_ 42 _quod earum [frumentationum] fiducia cultura agrorum
cessaret_.

[1325] _Aug_ 41 _usum eius (pecuniae) gratuitum iis qui cavere in duplum
possent_.

[1326] _Claud_ 25.

[1327] _Nero_ 31.

[1328] _Vesp_ 1.

[1329] _mancipem operarum quae ex Umbria in Sabinos ad culturam agrorum
quotannis commeare soleant._

[1330] _Vesp_ 4 _ad mangonicos quaestus_. Hence his nickname _mulio_, for
which as a sign of indigence cf Gellius XV 4.

[1331] _Domit_ 7, 9. See p 272.

[1332] Fronto p 144 Naber, cf Seneca _epist_ 44 § 3.

[1333] Sueton _fragm_ p 24 Reifferscheid, Gellius III 3.

[1334] Gellius V 3.

[1335] Gellius II 18.

[1336] Madaura was in the Numidian part of the Province, near the
Gaetulian border. See the _Apologia_ 24. Oea, referred to below, was in
the eastern strip, on the coast.

[1337] Juvenal VII 148-9 _nutricula causidicorum Africa_.

[1338] F Norden _Apuleius von Madaura und das Römische Privatrecht_
(Teubner 1912).

[1339] _Metamorphoses_ VIII 24. See Norden’s remarks pp 83-4.

[1340] See for instance _Metam_ IV 9, VI 31, VII 4, 9.

[1341] _Metam_ IX 39-42.

[1342] It seems certain that the convenience of humble rustics was little
regarded by the upper classes. Even Marcus Aurelius (in Fronto p 35
Naber) confesses to the reckless scattering of a flock of sheep and to
having been taken for a mounted brigand.

[1343] _Metam_ IX 35-8. This is a case of _periculum mortis ab hominis
potentis crudelitate aut odio_, referred to Digest XXXIX 6 § 3 [Paulus]
as a risk like that of war or brigandage.

[1344] _cuncta facile faciens in civitate._

[1345] Norden pp 161-3.

[1346] _cum alioquin pauperes etiam liberali legum praesidio de
insolentia locupletium consueverint vindicari._

[1347] Fierce dogs seem to have been a marked feature of country life.
See VIII 17, IX 2.

[1348] _hortulanus_, see IV 3, IX 31-2, 39-42.

[1349] See V 17, VII 15, VIII 17, 29, 31. Cf Norden pp 88-9.

[1350] IX 32. Cf the case of small farmers in Africa, _Apol_ 17, 23.

[1351] See IV 30, VIII 26. Cf Norden p 89, and pp 84-5 on metaphorical
use of the legal term _postliminium_, which occurs also in Rutilius _de
reditu_ I 214.

[1352] Norden pp 26-7.

[1353] _Apologia_ 17.

[1354] _an ipse mutuarias operas cum vicinis tuis cambies._

[1355] Because of the strict rules of the laws passed to check
manumission. Gaius I §§ 42-7. Norden p 86.

[1356] _Apol_ 23.

[1357] _triduo exarabas_, to mark the smallness of the _agellus_.

[1358] _Apol_ 93.

[1359] _Apol_ 47 XV _liberi homines populus est, totidem servi familia,
totidem vincti ergastulum_. See Norden p 87. _ergastulum_ = the inmates
of a lock-up, regarded as a body. See quotations from Columella p 263 and
Pliny p 285, Mayor on Juvenal XIV 24, and cf Lucan II 95. So _operae_ is
used = ‘hands.’

[1360] _viliconum_, _Apol_ 87. Cf _Metam_ VIII 22.

[1361] Norden p 81.

[1362] _Metam_ IX 12.

[1363] Herodian II 4 § 6.

[1364] δεσπότης.

[1365] Vopisc _Aurel_ 48 § 2.

[1366] Vopisc _Probus_ 16 § 6.

[1367] Trebell _Claud_ 9 §§ 4, 5. _Scythicis_ is an emendation. _senibus_
MSS.

[1368] _familias captivas._

[1369] Vopisc _Aurel_ 39 § 7.

[1370] Lamprid _Alex_ 55 §§ 2, 3, cf Trebell _Gallien_ 9 § 5.

[1371] Vopisc _Probus_ 18 §§ 1, 2. See Zosimus I 71 and No V of the
_Panegyrici_ cap 18 for other versions, in which the raiders are called
Franks.

[1372] Even the extreme license of the soldiery, in deposing and
murdering their own nominee, occurs repeatedly, and was no doubt one of
the chief evils that prompted the reforms of Diocletian.

[1373] O Seeck, _Untergang der antiken Welt_ book II ch 6.

[1374] See index under the word.

[1375] See chapter on evidence of the Digest.

[1376] See chapter on the African inscriptions.

[1377] This matter is ably treated at length by Seeck _op cit_ vol I pp
578-83. That they were distinct from _coloni_ and _servi_ is clear from
the later constitutions in Cod Theod V 17, 18 (9, 10), XII 19, and Cod
Just XI 48 § 13.

[1378] We shall find some reference to them later in the Codes.

[1379] Herodian VII 4 §§ 3-6.

[1380] τοὺς ἐκ τῶν ἀγρῶν οἰκέτας.

[1381] πεισθέντες κελεύουσι τοῖς δεσπόταις.

[1382] φύσει γὰρ πολυάνθρωπος οὖσα ἡ Λιβύη πολλοὺς εἶχε τοὺς τὴν γῆν
γεωργοῦντας.

[1383] ὑπερμαχόμενοι τῶν δεσποτῶν.

[1384] Capitolinus _Maximin_ 13 § 4, 14 § 1.

[1385] _per rusticanam plebem deinde et quosdam milites interemptus est._

[1386] Frontin gromat p 53.

[1387] _non exiguum populum plebeium._

[1388] _legere tironem ex vico._

[1389] This evidence has come to hand since Heisterbergk wrote (1876)
_Die Entstehung des Colonats_.

[1390] _op cit_ pp 116-8.

[1391] Dion Cass _epit_ LXXVI 10. For this story Dion is a contemporary
witness.

[1392] The special treatises on these documents are fully mentioned in
Girard’s _Textes de droit Romain_, ed 4, 1913. An essay on the _Colons du
saltus Burunitanus_ in Esmein’s _Mélanges_ (1886) is still of great value.

[1393] Text in Girard’s _Textes de droit Romain_ part III chapter 6.

[1394] We seem to have the names of two former owners, Varianus and
Mancia. For the retention of names of former owners see Dittenberger in
_Orientis Graeci inscriptiones selectae_ No 669 note 18. Rostowzew _Gesch
des Röm colonates_ ch 4 rejects this view and makes the _lex Manciana_ an
imperial law.

[1395] Pliny _epist_ III 19 § 7. Digest XIX 2 § 19², XXXII § 91¹, XXXIII
7 _passim_.

[1396] Dig XIX 2 § 3, and Monro’s note.

[1397] So Cuq, Seeck, Schulten, rightly I think. But in practice I
believe the chance seldom occurred.

[1398] Text in Girard, part I chapter 4 § 10.

[1399] This significant hint seems to have been almost normal in such
petitions. A good instance is the petition of Scaptoparene (see index,
_Inscriptions_).

[1400] It is perhaps worth noting that under Commodus the transport of
corn from Africa was specially provided for by the creation of a _classis
Africana_ for that purpose. See Lamprid _Commodus_ 17 §§ 7, 8.

[1401] De Coulanges pp 10 foll deals with this point at length, but I
think he pushes his conclusions too far.

[1402] Cf the Aragueni (see index, _Inscriptions_) παροίκων καὶ γεωργῶν
τῶν ὑμετέρων.

[1403] Dig I 19 § 3¹ is of a later date, but refers to a protective
rescript of Antoninus Pius. Cf XLIX 14 § 47¹, L 6 § 6¹¹. See Schulten in
_Hermes_ XLI pp 11-16.

[1404] CIL VIII 14428.

[1405] _[domum rev]ertamur ubi libere morari possimus._

[1406] Seneca _ad Helviam_ 7 § 7 _ubicumque vicit Romanus habitat_.

[1407] Text in Girard, part III chapter 6.

[1408] From comparing the remains of the next inscription (5) it appears
that the emperor is Hadrian.

[1409] Cf _agrum rudem provincialem_ in Hyginus, Gromat I 203. In the
later empire we find legislation to promote such cultivation. See cod Th
V 11 § 8 (365 AD), § 12 (388-392), 14 § 30 (386).

[1410] Dig XLI 3 § 33¹. Of course the _dominus_ could possess _per
colonum_. See Buckland, _Elementary Principles_ § 38 p 77.

[1411] _quae venibunt a possessoribus._

[1412] For _aridi fructus_ cf Digest XLIX 14 § 50.

[1413] _in cuius conductione agrum occupaverit._

[1414] _rationi_ (_bus fisci_) gives the sense. But _rationi_ simply may
be correct, cf Digest II 14 § 42, etc.

[1415] Girard cites Rostowzew’s opinion that the right to occupy
abandoned land as well as old wastes was an extension of the _lex
Manciana_ by the _lex Hadriana_.

[1416] See Dig XIX 2 §§ 15³, 24², 25³, 51ᵖʳ, 54¹.

[1417] Later legislation to prevent this neglect of poorer land. Cod Th V
14 § 34 (394 AD), X 3 § 4 (383), XI 1 § 4 (337), etc.

[1418] Prof Buckland writes to me that he believes these squatters
were to be owners, not _coloni_, owners in the only sense possible in
non-Italic soil, paying _tributum_. The words _frui possidere_ used to
describe their right are the technical words for provincial ownership. Cf
Gaius II 7.

[1419] In _Hermes_ XXIX pp 215, 224.

[1420] Girard, part III chapter 6.

[1421] _lege Manciana condicione saltus Neroniani vicini nobis._

[1422] It is tempting to identify these with the six mentioned in Nos (2)
and (4) above.

[1423] For the vast extent of imperial estates, particularly in Africa,
see Hirschfeld, _der Grundbesitz der Römischen Kaiser_, in his _Kleine
Schriften_.

[1424] De Coulanges seems hardly to recognize how small was the amount of
_operae_, a few days in the year. But in his tenth chapter he shews how
vastly the system was extended (so many days a week) in the early Middle
Age.

[1425] Mommsen in _Hermes_ XV pp 391-6.

[1426] Such as the _lex coloniae Genetivae Iuliae_ of 44 BC, and the
_leges_ of Salpensa and Malaca of 81-4 AD. Girard, and Bruns’ _Fontes_.

[1427] Esmein p 309 well refers to the passages in Lachmann’s
_Feldmesser_, Frontinus p 53 and Siculus Flaccus p 164. Cf Hirschfeld
l.c. p 558.

[1428] Colum I 6 §§ 7, 8.

[1429] Colum I 7.

[1430] _conductor_ and _coloni_ are both bound by the statute for the
_fundus_ or _saltus_. In theory both are tenants of the emperor, in
practice the _conductor_ has the upper hand, as Cuq points out.

[1431] Compare Dig XIX 2 § 15⁴ with § 25⁶.

[1432] _quasi societatis iure._ Of course not a real _socius_. See Index,
_colonia partiaria_, and Vinogradoff, _Growth of the Manor_ note 91 on p
109.

[1433] See Dig I 19 § 3¹, an opinion of Callistratus, a jurist of the
time of Severus. That in some sense or other the _coloni_ were tenants
of the emperor seems certain. See CIL VIII 8425 (Pertinax), 8426
(Caracalla), also 8702, 8777. And Esmein pp 313-5.

[1434] This becomes an important subject of legislation in the Theodosian
code. See Cod Th V 11 § 8, 14 § 30.

[1435] See de Coulanges pp 140-4, where this view is more strongly
expressed.

[1436] _Die Entstehung des Colonats_ pp 70 foll, citing especially
Frontinus Gromat I p 35 and Columella III 3 § 11.

[1437] This is very nearly the view of Wallon III 264 ‘le Colonat à
l’origine ne fut pas un droit mais un fait.’ Ib 266.

[1438] I have made some reference to it below in the chapter on the
_Digest_.

[1439] This is fully treated by Seeck, bk III c 5.

[1440] In the Ain el Djemala inscription we have them used indifferently.
It is not clear that the usage in various provinces was identical. See
Vinogradoff _Growth of the Manor_ pp 69, 70.

[1441] Given in a long note, vol I pp 578-83.

[1442] Marcian in Dig XXX § 112ᵖʳ. Cf L 15 § 4⁸ (Title _de censibus_) _si
quis inquilinum vel colonum non fuerit professus_ etc, where the mention
of _colonum_ is suspected of interpolation by Seeck.

[1443] Dig XXX § 112ᵖʳ _si quis inquilinos sine praediis quibus adhaerent
legaverit, inutile est legatum_ (Marcian). Esmein p 313 takes them to be
really slaves, but I cannot follow him.

[1444] This conclusion, I am pleased to find, had been forestalled by
Esmein p 307.

[1445] _Le Colonat Romain_ pp 125, 132.

[1446] In fact, as we say, _edited_.

[1447] Of this Title there is a useful little edition by the late C H
Monro.

[1448] XIX 2 § 15², 25⁶, also § 15¹,⁸.

[1449] XIX 2 § 15²,⁵.

[1450] XIX 2 §§ 15³, 24², 25³, 51ᵖʳ, 54¹.

[1451] XVII 2 § 46, XLIV 7 § 34², XLVII 2 § 68⁵.

[1452] XIX 2 § 54ᵖʳ, XX 6 § 14, etc.

[1453] XX 1 § 21ᵖʳ, XLIII 32, 33, XLVII 2 § 62³.

[1454] XIX 2 §§ 9²,³, 23, 51ᵖʳ, XLV 1 § 89.

[1455] XIX 2 § 52, cf XLIX 14 § 50.

[1456] XIX 2 § 25⁶ (Gaius?).

[1457] IX 2 § 27¹⁴, XLVII 2 § 83¹, § 10 § 5⁴. Compare also XIX 2 § 60⁵,
XLVII 2 § 52⁸. I cannot deal with the difficult legal questions involved
here. See Buckland’s _Elementary principles_ § 135.

[1458] XIX 2 §§ 15⁸, 24⁴, 25¹, XXXIII 4 § 1¹⁵.

[1459] VII 8 §§ 10⁴, 11. Having nothing to do with the _fructus_, the
usuary cannot interfere with the _colonus_.

[1460] XIX 2 § 54¹.

[1461] XIX 2 §§ 13¹¹, 14. The normal term of a lease was 5 years
(_lustrum, quinquennium_).

[1462] XIX 2 § 24¹, XLI 2 § 30⁶, XLIII 16 § 20. So in law of 224 AD, cod
Iust IV 65 § 6.

[1463] XII 2 § 28⁶.

[1464] XIX 2 § 25³, XL 7 § 40⁵. Compare the language of XXXIV 3 § 16 with
§ 18.

[1465] XIX 2 §§ 3, 54².

[1466] XIX 2 § 19², XXXII §§ 91¹, 93², 101¹, XXXIII 7 _passim_, esp § 4.
For the _vilicus_, XXXIII 7 §§ 18⁴, 20¹. A woman caretaker, _ibid_ § 15².

[1467] XXXIII 7 § 24.

[1468] XIX 2 §§ 19³, 25⁶.

[1469] XXXIII 7 §§ 18⁴, 20¹, XLVII 2 § 26¹. I note that de Coulanges p
14 holds that the contract rested solely on the basis of a fixed money
rent, citing (p 12) Gaius III 142, Dig XIX 2 § 2ᵖʳ (Gaius). But I am
not satisfied that cases of rent in kind were not subject to legal
remedy. See Monro on Dig XIX 2 § 19³, and Pliny _epist_ IX 37 § 3. And
Vinogradoff, _Growth of the Manor_ note 91 on p 109.

[1470] See XIX 2 § 15.

[1471] XIII 7 § 25, XXXI § 86¹.

[1472] VII 1 § 41, XXVII 9 § 13ᵖʳ.

[1473] VII 1 § 13⁴.

[1474] VII 4 §§ 8, 10.

[1475] XXXII § 91¹, L 16 § 198. Cf Juvenal I 75, Suet _Aug_ 72, _Gaius_
37, Palladius I 8, 11, 24, 33.

[1476] VII 1 § 13, XII 2 § 28⁶, XIX 2 §§ 25⁵, 29, XLVII 2 §§ 26¹, 62⁸, 7
§ 9.

[1477] XIX 2 §§ 55¹, 61ᵖʳ.

[1478] XLIII 24 § 13⁶.

[1479] XXXIX 3 §§ 4²,³, 5.

[1480] Alternative, XX 1 § 32.

[1481] A curious case is the putting in an _imaginarius colonus_ [of
course at a high nominal rent] in order to raise the selling price of a
farm. XIX 1 § 49 (jurist of 4th cent), earlier in Fr Vat § 13.

[1482] See XXXII § 41⁵, XXXIV 4 § 31ᵖʳ.

[1483] XXXIII 7 §§ 18⁴, 20¹, XL 7 § 40⁵.

[1484] XX 3 § 16, XXXIII 7 § 12³, 8 § 23³.

[1485] _servus actor_, his _rationes_, XL 7 § 40ᵖʳ,⁴,⁵.

[1486] His _reliqua_, XXXII §§ 91ᵖʳ, 97.

[1487] XXXIV 1 § 18³, 3 § 12, XL 7 § 40 _passim_.

[1488] XXXII §§ 41², 91ᵖʳ, XXXIII 7 §§ 12³⁸, 20³,⁴, 22¹. These refer to
_legata_, in which particular intention could be expressed, cf XXXII §
91¹.

[1489] IX 2 § 27⁹,¹¹, XIX 2 § 30⁴.

[1490] XXI 1 § 32, XXVIII 5 § 35³, XXXII §§ 60³, 68³, XXXIII 7 § 20.

[1491] See above on Martial pp 307-10.

[1492] XXXII § 99, XXXIII 7 _passim_, esp § 25¹. Buckland, _Slavery_ p 6.

[1493] Alfenus Varus in Dig XV 3 § 16.

[1494] Hence the frequent references to _peculia_. See XXXIII 8 _de
peculio legato_, where from §§ 6ᵖʳ, 8ᵖʳ, it appears that his _peculium_
might include land and houses. Cf de Coulanges pp 55-6, 66-7, 135-6.

[1495] XXXII § 97 etc.

[1496] XXXIII 7 § 12³ etc.

[1497] VII 7 § 3 _in hominis usu fructu operae sunt et ob operas
mercedes_ (Gaius), XII 6 § 55.

[1498] VII 1 §§ 25, 26, XIX 2 § 60⁷ (Labeo, time of Augustus, cited by
Javolenus).

[1499] XL 7 § 14ᵖʳ _mercedem referre pro operis suis_ (Alfenus), cf XLV 3
§ 18³.

[1500] XXXIII 7 §§ 18⁴, 20¹. _mercede_ or _pensionis certa quantitate_ as
opposed to _fide dominica_.

[1501] VIII 6 § 20, XLIII 16 § 1²⁰, 24 § 3ᵖʳ.

[1502] XLIII 24 § 5¹¹.

[1503] XLI 1 § 44.

[1504] XLVII 14, cf XLVIII 19 § 16⁷, XLIX 16 § 5².

[1505] In XIX 2 § 25⁴ (Gaius?) the tenant is held to blame for wilful
damage done by a neighbour with whom he has a quarrel.

[1506] XVIII 1 § 35⁸.

[1507] XLVII 21 § 2.

[1508] XLIII 16, _de vi et de vi armata_.

[1509] XLI 3 § 33¹ etc.

[1510] XLI 2 §§ 3⁸,¹², 25¹, etc.

[1511] VIII 3 _de servitutibus praediorum rusticorum_. Specimens of
inscribed notices of servitudes, Girard _textes_ part III ch 3 § 1.

[1512] VII 1 § 27³, XIX 2 § 15² (Ulpian). The abuse of the quartering of
troops was no new evil in the Provinces. We hear of it from Cicero. In
the third century AD we have the notable petitions from Scaptoparene in
Thrace (238) text in Mommsen _ges Schr_ II 174-6, and from the Aragueni
in Asia Minor (244-7), text in Dittenberger _Or Graec inscr_ No 519. For
Italy in 5th century see on Symmachus.

[1513] XIX 2 §§ 9³, 15.

[1514] XLI 1 § 7¹⁻⁶, etc.

[1515] XI 4 § 1¹, cf Paulus _sent_ I 6 _a_ § 5.

[1516] Dealt with later in the Codes as a frequent evil. For early
medieval laws on the point see de Coulanges p 152.

[1517] XLVII 9 §§ 3³, 16, Paulus _sent_ V 3 § 4.

[1518] XIII 4 § 3.

[1519] Callistratus in L 11 § 2, quoting Plato _rep_ 371 _a-c_.

[1520] XLVII 11 § 9.

[1521] XLVII 11 § 10, cf cod Th IX 32 § 1, cod Just IX 38.

[1522] _agri vectigales_ or (as the title calls them by a later name)
_emphyteuticarii_. VI 3 §§ 1, 2, XIX 1 § 13⁶, XLIII 9 § 1, L 16 § 219.
Large blocks were also hired by middlemen (_mancipes_) and sublet in
parcels to _coloni_, XIX 2 § 53.

[1523] VI 3 §§ 1, 3.

[1524] L 8 § 2¹.

[1525] _subiectis aliorum nominibus._

[1526] XXXIX 4 § 11¹, _auctoritate principali_.

[1527] Gaius III 145 concludes that the contract in these leases is one
of letting and hiring, not of purchase and sale. That is, it includes
everything save the bare _dominium_, notably _possessio_, and, as Prof
Buckland points out to me, covenants usual in such cases could be
enforced by the _actio ex locato_.

[1528] XXXIX 4 § 11⁵.

[1529] XLIX 14 § 3⁶.

[1530] _principalibus rescriptis._ From the text I infer that these are
later than Hadrian.

[1531] XXX § 39¹⁰, XIX 2 § 49.

[1532] XLIX 14 § 47¹ (Paulus).

[1533] XLIII 8 § 2⁴ (Ulpian), a very important passage.

[1534] Papirius Justus in L 1 § 38¹, _muneribus fungi sine damno fisci
oportere_.

[1535] Callistratus in L 6 § 6¹¹, _ut idoniores praediis fiscalibus
habeantur_.

[1536] References are endless. Most significant is L 4 § 4 (Ulpian)
_honores qui indicuntur_.

[1537] Title XLIX 14 _de iure fisci_.

[1538] II 14 § 42 (Papinian).

[1539] XLIX 14 § 3¹⁰.

[1540] XLVIII 22 § 1, cf XLIX 14 §§ 47, 50, (Paulus).

[1541] That they did sometimes suffer may be inferred from the case of
the Aragueni (p 374) who describe themselves as πάροικοι and γεωργοὶ (=
_inquilini_ and _coloni_) of the emperor.

[1542] L 5 §§ 10, 11, etc.

[1543] See Spartian _Hadrian_ 7 § 5, Capitolinus _Anton_ 12 § 3, Spartian
_Severus_ 14 § 2.

[1544] De Coulanges makes it his main thesis that the later colonate was
a creation of custom, at length recognized by law. My conclusions here
were reached before reading his fine treatise.

[1545] _attributi_ or _contributi_. See Mommsen, _Staatsrecht_ III, _die
attribuirten Orte_.

[1546] Cf Dig XXXIII 2 § 28 _indictiones temporariae_ [Paulus], XIX 1 §
13⁶ [Ulpian].

[1547] Pliny _paneg_ 29 (of imperial subjects) _nec novis indictionibus
pressi ad vetera tributa deficiunt_.

[1548] Hence cod Theod has a title _de superindictionibus_.

[1549] The rising of the Bagaudae in Gaul, at least partly due to
agricultural distress, had been put down by Maximian in 285-6. See
Schiller III pp 124-6.

[1550] It is true that the _colonus_ was guaranteed against disturbance,
but I think de Coulanges pp 114-7, 123 makes too much of this.

[1551] There were in the latter half of the third century some signs of
the coming reconstruction. But they came to no effect.

[1552] Cod Th V 17 (9) § 1 _apud quemcumque colonus iuris alieni fuerit
inventus, is non solum, eundem origini suae restituat verum super eodem
capitationem temporis agnoscat_ ... etc. Runaway _coloni_ are to be
chained like slaves, _iuris alieni_ = the control of someone other than
the person harbouring him. The _colonus_ is legally dependent, though
nominally free.

[1553] See Weber, _Agrargeschichte_ pp 256 foll.

[1554] See Seeck II 320 foll, 330 foll.

[1555] Cod Just XI 59 § 1, in which Constantine, finding the _civitatum
ordines_ unequal to this burden, extends the liability to other landlords
also.

[1556] See Seeck II 214 foll, 223, 249, IV 88.

[1557] Seeck II 249, 284. See Cod Th XI 2 §§ 1-5 (dates 365-389), not in
Cod Just.

[1558] Heisterbergk p 59 with references. Seeck, _Schatzungsordnung_ pp
302-5.

[1559] The details of this system are fully discussed in Seeck’s great
article, _die Schatzungsordnung Diocletians_, in the Ztschr für social
und Wirthschaftsgeschichte 1896.

[1560] Digest I 5 § 17, Dion Cass LXXVII 9 § 5. Schiller _Geschichte_ I
pp 750-1 thinks that military motives had much to do with it, as adding
to the citizen troops. What is supposed to be a copy of the edict itself
has been found in a papyrus, see Girard, _textes_ part I ch 4 § 12. The
text is in the Giessen papyri No 40. It seems certain that the lowest
class of _peregrini_ (the _dediticii_) were not included in the grant.

[1561] See Seeck II 323. Cf Lactant _mort pers_ 23 § 5, Victor _Caes_ 39
§ 31.

[1562] Through the _ius commercii_.

[1563] Seeck, _Schatzungsordnung_, cited above.

[1564] A long title in cod Th is devoted to remissions, XI 28, consisting
of temporary laws. And these deal chiefly with Italian and African
Provinces, notably §§ 7, 12, with Campania. They date from 395 to 436.

[1565] In the panegyric (No VIII cap 11) on Constantine we have mention
of a reduction of 7000 _capita_ for relief of a district in Gaul.

[1566] Cod Th XI 1 § 14. Cf. Seeck, _Schatzungsordnung_ pp 315-6.

[1567] Compare the conduct of the magistrates of Antioch in the evidence
of Libanius cited below.

[1568] See for instance cod Th XIII 10 § 1.

[1569] See below, in section on Salvian.

[1570] See Ammianus XIX 11 § 3, Victor _Caesares_ 13 §§ 5, 6. A long
title cod Th VIII 5 is devoted to the _cursus_, containing 66 laws from
315 to 407, and other references abound.

[1571] Cf cod Th XI 16 § 3 (324), § 4 (328).

[1572] Cf Cic II _in Verr_ III § 190, Tac _Agr_ 19. Cf cod Th XI 1 § 22
(386), with Godefroi’s notes, also §§ 11 (365) and 21 (385), XIV 4 § 4
(367).

[1573] See the title _de naviculariis_, cod Th XIII 5, including 38 laws.

[1574] Cod Th XIV 18 _de mendicantibus non invalidis_.

[1575] If I rightly interpret Dig L 5 § 1² (Ulpian) cases had occurred
earlier of men liable to office even pretending to be mere _coloni_ in
order to evade liability (_ad colonos praediorum se transtulerunt_. See
Dirksen under _transferre_).

[1576] Very significant is the law cod Th XVI 5 § 48 (410) by which even
heretics are held to curial duty.

[1577] See Seeck, _Schatzungsordnung_ pp 315-6, De Coulanges p 119.

[1578] See Weber, _Agrargeschichte_ pp 266-7.

[1579] Cf cod Th XI 16 _passim_.

[1580] A rule of 366, or later according to Mommsen, cod Th XI 1 § 14,
cod Just XI 48 § 4.

[1581] Cf cod Th XIII 10 § 3, retained in cod Just XI 48 § 2, plainly
recognizing this.

[1582] See the advantages of the colonate summed up in de Coulanges p
144, and cf _ibid_ p 139.

[1583] Lactantius _de mort pers_ 7 § 3.

[1584] _enormitate indictionum._

[1585] Cf Augustin _de civ Dei_ X 1 _coloni, qui condicionem debent
genitali solo, propter agri culturam sub dominio possessorum_.

[1586] Cf cod Th V 17 (9) §§ 1, 2 (332), etc.

[1587] Cod Th XI 3 § 2.

[1588] The _capitatio_.

[1589] Cod Just XI 48 § 7.

[1590] _Schatzungsordnung_ pp 313-4.

[1591] Rostowzew _Geschichte des Röm Colonates_ pp 381-97 traces the
abandonment of the policy of favouring _coloni_, and adoption of reliance
on great possessors, as a result of the pressing difficulties of the
collection of revenue.

[1592] Cod Just XI 50 § 1 (Constantine).

[1593] Cod Just XI 50 § 2.

[1594] Cod Th XI 1 § 12 (365).

[1595] Wallon, _Esclavage_ III 266, 282.

[1596] For instance cod Th XI 11 (date somewhere 368-373), IV 13 §§ 2, 3
(321). Also XI 7-10, 16 § 10, etc.

[1597] Seeck, _Schatzungsordnung_ pp 285-308, with an account of local
variations. For instance, in Africa and Egypt there was no _capitatio_.

[1598] See cod Th VII 13 § 7, 8 (375, 380). Even the imperial estates
made liable, ibid § 12 (397). Dill p 196. In 379 Theodosius had to raise
recruits from γεωργοί, Libanius XXIV 16.

[1599] Cod Th VII 18 § 10, cf VIII 2 § 3 (380). See Seeck II 490-1.

[1600] Cod Th VIII 2 § 3. By long use the word had become quite official.
Cf _inopes ac vagi_ in Tac _ann_ IV 4, etc.

[1601] Cod Just XII 33 § 6.

[1602] De Coulanges pp 168-9 points out that in the early Middle Age we
find _ingenui_ = _coloni_.

[1603] _temonaria functio._ See Dirksen under _temo_. Cod Th XI 16 §§ 14,
15, 18, cf VII 13 § 7, VI 26 § 14.

[1604] Wallon III 149, 476.

[1605] Cod Th VII 13 § 7, where occur the words _cum corpora postulantur_
opposed to _aurum_. For the money-commutation (_adaeratio_) often
accepted from the landlords see Mommsen _Ges Schr_ VI p 254 _Das Röm
Militärwesen seit Diocletian_. Also Rostowzew in the _Journal of Roman
Studies_ vol VIII on _Synteleia tironon_, and Wagner on Ammianus XIX 11 §
7.

[1606] Cf Vegetius _rei milit_ I 7, of the disasters caused by slovenly
recruiting, _dum indicti possessoribus tirones per gratiam aut
dissimulationem probantium tales sociantur armis quales domini habere
fastidiunt_.

[1607] Cod Th IV 13 §§ 2, 3, kept with variants in cod Just IV 61 § 5.

[1608] Cod Th XI 8.

[1609] Cod Th XI 16 § 10, 17 §§ 2-4.

[1610] For the special position of imperial senators see Dill pp 126,
166, 196, 218 foll.

[1611] Cod Th XI 11, kept with some omissions in cod Just XI 55 § 2.

[1612] Cod Th XI 16 § 4, cod Just XI 48 § 1.

[1613] Seeck I, chapter on _die Ausrottung der Besten_.

[1614] Pliny _NH_ XVIII 296. Palladius VII 2.

[1615] _hoc compendio._ Pall.

[1616] _Orat_ 50. I take the date given by Förster.

[1617] For such properties see cod Th X 3.

[1618] φιλανθρωπότατε βασιλεῦ.

[1619] § 36 γράμμασι, which I take to be = _indictiones_.

[1620] In cod Th the title XI 24 is _de patrociniis vicorum_, and the
laws range from 360 to 415. Cod Just XI 54 shews that the evil was still
in existence in 468.

[1621] _Orat_ 47 §§ 8-10. Zulueta (see below) points out that the
protection given by the patrons was exerted quite as much by improper
influence on judges as by use of force.

[1622] § 6 τοῦτο καὶ λῃστὰς γεωργοὺς ἑποίησε.

[1623] § 11 ἀλλὰ καὶ οἷς εἷς ὁ δεσπότης.

[1624] §§ 19-21.

[1625] § 24 ὦν εἰσιν (οἱ γεωργοί).

[1626] §§ 17, 18.

[1627] § 34.

[1628] §§ 36-8 δὸς δὴ νεῦρα τῷ νόμῳ καὶ ποίησον αὐτὸν ὡς ἀληθῶς νόμον
ἀντὶ ψιλῆς προσηγορίας ... etc.

[1629] Cod Th XI 24 § 2 (Valens).

[1630] Note that the law Cod Th XII 1 § 128, sternly forbidding
_militares viri_ to interfere with _curiales_ or to use any violence to
leading men in the municipalities, is dated 392 July 31. Also that it is
retained in Cod Just X 32 § 42. Zulueta _de patrociniis vicorum_ pp 38-40
concludes that it is uncertain to what emperor Libanius is appealing, and
places the date in 386-9 AD. He finds the reference in Cod Th V 17 § 2
(Theodosius), not in XI 24 § 2.

[1631] The leading authority on Symmachus is O Seeck. In particular the
dating of many of the letters in his great edition (MGH, Berlin 1883) is
often helpful.

[1632] See _epist_ II 6, 7, 52, IV 5 (4), 18, 21, IX 14, 114 (124), X 2,
21, _relat_ 3 §§ 15-18, 9 § 7, 18, 35, 37.

[1633] _epist_ III 55, 82, IV 54, 74, VII 38, 68, _relat_ 18.

[1634] _epist_ II 6, III 55, 82, IX 42, VII 68, _relat_ 9, 18, 37.

[1635] _epist_ VII 66, IX 10, _relat_ 18.

[1636] _epist_ II 55, IV 68.

[1637] _epist_ VI 15 (14).

[1638] _epist_ VI 15 (14), VII 18, 68. Seeck, V 284, 555.

[1639] _epist_ I 5 _ut rus quod solebat alere nunc alatur_. Cf cod Th XI
1 § 4.

[1640] _epist_ VI 82 (81).

[1641] _nihilque iam colonis superest facultatum quod aut rationi
opituletur aut cultui._

[1642] _epist_ VII 56 _cum sit colonus agrorum meorum atque illi debita
magis quam precaria cura praestetur_.

[1643] _epist_ IX 6. Cf IX 11.

[1644] _epist_ IX 47 (50).

[1645] _epist_ IX 140 (X 18).

[1646] _epist_ VIII 2. Plin _epist_ I 6, V 6 § 46.

[1647] Amm Marc XXVIII 4 § 18 _alienis laboribus venaturi_.

[1648] _epist_ II 22.

[1649] _epist_ V 18.

[1650] _epist_ II 52. Cf the cases contemplated in Dig XIX 2 §§ 13⁷, 15².

[1651] _epist_ VII 38.

[1652] _epist_ IX 45 (48).

[1653] _epist_ VI 11.

[1654] _epist_ IX 27 (30).

[1655] _epist_ VII 66, IX 49 (52). In the law of 414 Cod Th XVI 5 § 54 we
have these _conductores privatorum opposed to conductores domus nostrae_
in Africa. See above, chapter on the African inscriptions.

[1656] _epist_ VI 12.

[1657] In _quality_ the Apulian wheat was thought excellent. Varro _RR_ I
2 § 6.

[1658] _epist_ IX 29.

[1659] _epist_ VII 126 _res ... non tam reditu ampla quam censu_.

[1660] _epist_ IX 11 _sed maior opitulatio ex tui arbitrii favore
proveniet, cum causae eius etiam iustitia non desit_.

[1661] _epist_ IX 37 (40).

[1662] _ut perspiciatur in discretione iudicium._

[1663] _epist_ IX 47 (50).

[1664] _epist_ IX 10.

[1665] _epist_ VI 59 (58), 65 (64).

[1666] _epist_ IV 74.

[1667] _epist_ II 7.

[1668] _quanto nobis odio provinciarum constat illa securitas._

[1669] _relatio_ 40.

[1670] _quod nihil subsidii decreta dudum oppida conferebant._ This seems
to imply a previous grant to Tarracina, levied on other towns. Cf _relat_
37 _decretae provinciae_, referring to supply of Rome.

[1671] _Capuana legatio._ Meaning _Campanian_, I take it.

[1672] Neratius Cerealis, praef annonae 328, praef urbi 352-3, consul
358. Godefroi’s Prosopographia, Wilmanns inscr 1085, and cod Th XIV 24.
The order is given thus, _eum frumenti numerum, quem Cerealis ex multis
urbibus Romano populo vindicarat, restitui omnibus_.

[1673] _secretum._

[1674] XVI 5 §§ 14, 15.

[1675] Seeck, _Schatzungsordnung_ p 306, keeps the MS reading _capitulis_
here. See his remarks, and for the word _capitulum_ cf cod Th XI 16 § 15
(382) _capituli atque temonis necessitas_, ibid § 14 _capitulariae sive
... temonariae functionis_.

[1676] The title cod Th XI 28 is _de indulgentiis debitorum_.

[1677] _norat enim hoc facto se aliquid locupletibus additurum, cum
constet ubique pauperes inter ipsa indictorum exordia solvere universa
sine laxamento conpelli._ We shall return to this point in connexion with
Salvian.

[1678] XVII 3.

[1679] _quicquid in capitatione deesset ex conquisitis se supplere._
_conquisita_ are the sums produced by a _superindictio_ raising
the amount to be levied. Cf cod Th XI 1 § 36, and title XI 6 _de
superindicto_.

[1680] Cf XXX 5 § 6 _provisorum_, cod Th XII 1 § 169 _tuae provisionis
... incrementis_.

[1681] _indictionale augmentum._

[1682] _sollemnia ... nedum incrementa._

[1683] XVIII 1.

[1684] _quorum patrimonia publicae clades augebant._

[1685] XVIII 2 § 2 and references in Wagner’s edition. Schiller,
_Kaiserzeit_ II p 313.

[1686] XXIX 5 §§ 10-13.

[1687] _messes et condita hostium virtutis nostrorum horrea esse._

[1688] As when in Pannonia (373) they crossed the Danube and _occupatam
circa messem agrestem adortae sunt plebem_, XXIX 6 § 6.

[1689] XXIX 5 § 13 _in modum urbis exstruxit_.

[1690] XXIX 5 § 25 _muro circumdatum valido_. In XXX 10 § 4 we find
_Murocincta_ as the name of a _villa_ and _Triturrita_ in Rutilius _de
reditu_ I 527, 615. Cf cases in Caesar’s time, _Bell Afr_ 9, 40, 65.

[1691] XXVIII 6 § 8.

[1692] XXX 2 § 10 _negotiis se ruralibus dedit_.

[1693] There was much jealousy on this score, and a powerful reaction, as
after the death of Valentinian in 375, but even then the foreign element
prevailed. Schiller II 389.

[1694] XXXI 4 §§ 4, 5.

[1695] _ex ultimis terris tot tirocinia._ Cf XIX 11 § 7.

[1696] _et pro militari supplemento, quod provinciatim annuum pendebatur,
thesauris accederet auri cumulus magnus._ I hope I am right in referring
this to the _temonaria functio_ or obligation of paying the _temo_ = the
price of a recruit. Cod Th XI 16 §§ 14, 15.

[1697] XXXI 6 § 5.

[1698] _dudum a mercatoribus venundati, adiectis plurimis quos primo
transgressu necati inedia vino exili vel panis frustris mutavere
vilissimis._

[1699] XXXI 10 § 17, _inventute valida nostris tirociniis permiscenda_.

[1700] XXVIII 5 § 15 of Theodosius defeating Alamanni, _pluribus caesis,
quoscumque cepit ad Italiam iussu principis misit, ubi fertilibus pagis
acceptis iam tributarii circumcolunt Padum_. 370 AD. Cf XXXI 9 § 4, 377
AD, and XX 4 § 1, 360 AD.

[1701] For instance, _in Rufinum_ I 200-5, _de bello Gildon_ 105-12, _de
IV cos Honor_ 412-8.

[1702] _in Rufin_ I 380-2.

[1703] _in Rufin_ I 189-92.

[1704] _metuenda colonis fertilitas._

[1705] _in Eutrop_ I 401-9.

[1706] _de bello Gildon_ 49-74.

[1707] See Bury, _Later Roman empire_ I 108-9, Seeck, _Untergang_ V
379-80, Dill, _Roman Society_ p 233, Wallon, _Esclavage_ III 276-7. The
affair is referred to in cod Th X 10 § 25 (Dec 408).

[1708] _de cos Stilichonis_ II 204-7.

[1709] _in Eutrop_ II 194-210.

[1710] _bene rura Gruthungus excolet et certo disponet sidere vites._

[1711] _quem detinet aequi gloria concessoque cupit vixisse colonus quam
dominus rapto._

[1712] _in Eutrop_ I 406 _Teutonicus vomer_.

[1713] _de bell Goth_ 450-68.

[1714] _non iam dilectus miseri nec falce per agros deposita iaculum
vibrans ignobile messor ... sed vera inventus, verus ductor adest et
vivida Martis imago._

[1715] Cf Vegetius _rei milit_ I 7, of disasters in recent times, _dum
longa pax militem incuriosius legit_.

[1716] _in Eutrop_ II 370-5.

[1717] _de bell Goth_ 366-72.

[1718] _epitoma rei militaris_ I 3.

[1719] _rei milit_ I 5, _senos pedes vel certe quinos et denas uncias_
[has not _ad_ fallen out before _senos_?]. In a law of 367, cod Th VII 13
§ 3 _in quinque pedibus et septem unciis_.

[1720] _tunc._ When? From I 28 it might be inferred that he looks back to
the first Punic war. But I do not think so.

[1721] _necdum enim civilis pars florentiorem abduxerat iuventutem._ So I
7 _civilia sectantur officia_.

[1722] The assertion that _Martius calor_ has not subsided (I 28),
accepted by Seeck I 413, seems to me rhetorical bravado. Much more likely
is the view (_ib_ 414) that the improved standard of recruits in the
fifth century was due to prevalence of barbarians.

[1723] Seeck II 88 foll. Hence army service was called _militia armata_.

[1724] _mulomed_ I 56 §§ 11-13.

[1725] _si saepius et cum moderatione animalia sedeantur._ For _sederi_
cf § 35 _sub honesto sessore_, Spart Hadr 22 § 6, cod Th IX 30 § 3.

[1726] _servorum impatientia._

[1727] _neque enim de damno domini cogitant, quod eidem contingere
gratulantur._

[1728] Julian _orat_ VII p 232 a-b.

[1729] Above, p 393.

[1730] _de mortibus persecutorum_ 22-3.

[1731] For the _census_ under the new system, first in 297 and then every
fifth year, see Seeck II pp 263 foll. It was only concerned with the
land and taxation units liable to the levy of _annona_. De Coulanges pp
75-85 urges that the system already described by Ulpian in Dig L 15 §§ 3,
4, is much the same, and points out that monastic records shew it still
surviving in the early Middle Age. But practice, rather than principle,
is here in question.

[1732] _hominum capita._ In most provinces the taxable unit was fixed by
taking account of the number of able-bodied on each estate as well as of
the acreage. Seeck II 266 foll, also _Schatzung_ pp 285-7.

[1733] The urban taxation was conducted in each town by the local
_decemprimi_, aldermen, and was quite distinct.

[1734] _adscribebantur quae non habebantur_ may mean ‘were put on the
record as owning what they did not own.’

[1735] _pecuniae pro capitibus pendebantur._ The _capita_ here seem to
have a double sense.

[1736] De Coulanges pp 75-6 treats it severely on the score of Christian
prejudice.

[1737] Sulp Sev _dial_ II 3.

[1738] For instance cod Th VII 1 § 12, VIII 5, XI 10, 11.

[1739] Cod Th VII 20 § 7.

[1740] Sulp Sev _vita S Martini_ 2 § 5, and cf cod Th VII 22, also 1 § 8.
See the note of Seeck II 490.

[1741] This view has been challenged by Dill, pp 118-9. But cf Sidonius
_epist_ V 19, IX 6.

[1742] The earlier part of book V of the _de gubernatione Dei_,
especially §§ 34-50. The rising of the Bagaudae (286) in Gaul is dealt
with §§ 24 foll. See Schiller II pp 124-6.

[1743] _dediticios se divitum faciunt et quasi in ius eorum dicionemque
trascendunt._

[1744] _addicunt_, a technical law term.

[1745] _possesio ... capitatio._

[1746] _pervasio_ = attack, encroachment. Cf cod Th II 4 §§ 5, 6.

[1747] _fundos maiorum expetunt et coloni divitum fiunt._

[1748] _iugo se inquilinae abiectionis addicunt._ See cod Th V 18 (10)
_de inquilinis et colonis_, cod Just XI 48 § 13.

[1749] _fiunt praeiudicio habitationis indigenae._ That is, by
prescription they acquire a new _origo_. See cod Th V 17 (9) §§ 1, 2, 18
(10), cod Just XI 64 § 2, 48 § 16.

[1750] _extraneos et alienos_; that is, belonging to someone else.

[1751] _et miramur si nos barbari capiunt, cum fratres nostros faciamus
esse captivos?_

[1752] I think de Coulanges is too severe on the rhetoric of Salvian (pp
141-3). After all, the Codes do not give one a favourable picture of the
later colonate, and the Empire did fall in the West.

[1753] This arrangement was especially frequent in the East. See on
Libanius pp 400-1, and cod Th XI 24 _de patrociniis vicorum_, cf cod Just
XI 54. But so far as individuals were concerned it was widespread.

[1754] Seeck cites cod Th III 1 § 2 [337], XI 1 § 26 [399], 3 §§ 1-5
[319-391], and for the legal tricks used to defeat the rule XI 3 § 3.

[1755] _de gub Dei_ V § 18 _quae enim sunt non modo urbes sed etiam
municipia atque vici ubi non quot curiales fuerint tot tyranni sunt?_

[1756] From _adscribere_, to record the liability of the lord, his
_coloni_ came to be called _adscripticii_. Weber _Agrargeschichte_ p 258.

[1757] Cod Th XI 1 § 26 [399] refers especially to Gaul. He is _servus
terrae_ in fact, as Weber _Agrargeschichte_ p 258 remarks.

[1758] In Esmein’s _Mélanges_ [1886] there is an excellent essay on some
of the letters of Sidonius discussed here, forestalling a number of my
conclusions.

[1759] See Seeck II 175 foll.

[1760] Sidon _epist_ I 10.

[1761] See Dill, _Roman Society in the last century of the Western
Empire_, p 179.

[1762] See _epist_ II 2, 9, 14, IV 24, VIII 4.

[1763] _epist_ VII 12 § 3.

[1764] _quia sic habenas Galliarum moderarere ut possessor exhaustus
tributario iugo relevaretur._

[1765] Instances in _epist_ III 1, VI 10.

[1766] _epist_ III 5.

[1767] _suffragio vestro._

[1768] _epist_ VI 10.

[1769] _domesticis fidei_, already, it seems, a stereotyped phrase. See
Ducange.

[1770] _debitum glaebae canonem._

[1771] _epist_ VI 12.

[1772] See Dill, book IV ch 3.

[1773] _aggeres publici_, cf _epist_ II 9 § 2, IV 24 § 2. It is an
official expression, used by jurists.

[1774] No doubt some were castles, more or less defensible. The _burgus_
of Leontius by the Garonne was such, cf _carm_ XXII 121-5.

[1775] _epist_ I 6, VII 15, VIII 8.

[1776] _epist_ II 14.

[1777] _epist_ IV 9 § 1, VII 14 § 11. _liberti_ mentioned VII 16. See
Dill p 178.

[1778] _epist_ VIII 4 § 1.

[1779] _epist_ II 2. Cf Dill pp 168-72.

[1780] In _epist_ III 9 is a curious case of a farmer who owned slaves
and in his slack simplicity let them be enticed away to Britain.

[1781] Dill p 220, citing _epist_ IV 24. See Esmein pp 377-83 for the
legal points of the case.

[1782] _centesima_, that is 1% _per mensem_, I suppose.

[1783] _epist_ IX 6. See Dill pp 174-5.

[1784] _epist_ V 19.

[1785] _sub condicione concedo, si stupratorem pro domino iam patronus
originali solvas inquilinatu._

[1786] _mox cliens factus e tributario plebeiam potius incipiat habere
personam quam colonariam._

[1787] He calls his solution _compositio seu satisfactio_. Esmein pp
364 foll shews that _compositio_ was now a regular expression for
the practice of avoiding the strict Roman Law, under barbarian and
ecclesiastical influences.

[1788] See Index, _inquilini_, and de Coulanges pp 65, 74, 85.

[1789] See de Coulanges pp 100-1.

[1790] See this question fully discussed by Esmein pp 370-5. Also the
doubts of de Coulanges pp 101, 104.

[1791] For this point see Seeck, _Schatzungsordnung_ pp 314-5.

[1792] Cod Th V 18 [10] _si quis colonus originalis vel inquilinus_ ...
etc. And below, _originarius_ [419]. Cod Just XI 48 § 13 _inquilinos
colonosve, quorum quantum ad originem pertinet vindicandam indiscreta
eademque paene videtur esse condicio, licet sit discrimen in nomine_,
... etc, and § 14 _causam originis et proprietatis_. The limiting word
_paene_ may refer to difference in mode of payment of taxes. These laws,
retained in cod Just, date from 400.

[1793] Seeck just cited. Weber, _Agrargeschichte_ p 257.

[1794] E Meyer _Kl Schr_ p 185 takes the words of Aristotle _Pol_ I 2
§ 5 ὁ γὰρ βοῦς ἀντ’ οἰκέτου τοῖς πένησίν ἐστιν as proving that even in
Ar’s time the small farmer had to do without a slave. I think they prove
that if he could not afford a slave he must do with an ox only. For the
additional protection of the ox see Index. Cf Maine, _Early Law and
Custom_ pp 249-51.

[1795] E Meyer _Kl Schriften_ p 179 will only use the word _slaves_ of a
part of these, but the distinction does not matter here.

[1796] See Dig XXXII § 99 (Paulus), and XXXIII 7 _passim_, especially §
25¹.

[1797] That religious scruple was opposed to keeping members of the same
race-unit in slavery is most probable. This _trans Tiberim_ rule is known
from Gellius XX 1 § 47, referring to debt-slaves. Greeks however, even
when abhorring the enslavement of Greek by Greek in principle, did not
discontinue the practice. E Meyer _Kl Schr_ p 202 compares the medieval
scruple in reference to brother Christians. See also his remarks p 177.
For Hebrew law and custom see _Encyclopaedia Biblica_ (1903) vol IV and
Hastings’ _Dictionary of the Bible_ (1902) vol IV, articles _Slavery_.

[1798] Different also from the position of a food-producer class in a
great territorial state, being based on local conditions.

[1799] Illustrated with great clearness in the provisions of the Gortyn
laws.

[1800] Varro _RR_ I 17 § 2 on _obaerarii_ or _obaerati_.

[1801] The relative importance of land and the means of cultivation
[especially oxen] in early times, the power thus gained by chiefs
granting cattle to tenants, and the connexion of these phenomena with
legends of debt-slavery, are instructively discussed in Maine’s _Early
history of Institutions_, lecture VI.

[1802] Mr G G Coulton kindly reminds me of an analogy observable in the
history of Art. It is progressive on simple lines up to a certain point.
Then it begins to ramify, and differences of taste become more acute.
Hence an anarchy of taste, driving men to yearn (like Ruskin, Morris,
etc.) for the old simplicity. So the peasant up to a point is useful and
noble. But fresh currents of civilization alter his position. Then men
yearn for the old simplicity, only defective through being essentially
simple.

[1803] Mr Zimmern, _The Greek Commonwealth_ pp 265 foll, has some
interesting remarks on craftsmen as wage-earners, and points out their
preference for serving the state rather than private employers. The
latter plan would have put them almost in the position of slaves.

[1804] When food was provided, we must reckon it as part of his wage.

[1805] A vast number of Greek records of manumission refer to such cases.

[1806] See Francotte, _L’Industrie dans la Grèce ancienne_ book II
chap 5, _La concurrence servile_. I cannot follow E Meyer _Kl Schr_ pp
198-201. And the oft-cited passage of Timaeus (Athen VI 264 d), where
free Phocians object to slaves taking their employment, refers solely to
domestic and personal attendance.

[1807] Of this there is abundant American evidence from writers on
Slavery. The hired slave sometimes got a higher wage than the hired
freeman.

[1808] See Whitaker’s Almanack, and the exposure of an impudent agency
for the purpose in the _Times_ 15 Sept 1914.

[1809] Compare Wendell Phillips ‘Before this there had been among us
scattered and single abolitionists, earnest and able men; sometimes, like
Wythe of Virginia, in high places. The Quakers and Covenanters had never
intermitted their testimony against slavery. But Garrison was the first
man to begin a _movement_ designed to annihilate slavery.’ Speech at G’s
funeral 1879.

[1810] Prof Bury, _Idea of Progress_ p 275, points out that Guizot noted
that Christianity did not in its early stages aim at any improvement of
social conditions.

[1811] The conclusions reached in this paragraph are in agreement with E
Meyer _Kl Schr_ pp 151-2, 155, 205, 209. But he seems to put the decline
of the slave-gang system rather earlier than I venture to do.

[1812] We must bear in mind that a tenant was naturally unwilling to work
for a margin of profit not to be retained by himself. Hence the tendency
to find means of constraining him to do so.

[1813] _coloni_ or _quasi coloni_, cf Dig XV 3 § 16, XXXIII 8 § 23³, or
XXXIII 7 §§ 12³, 18⁴, 20¹, and numerous other references.

[1814] The compulsory tenure of municipal offices is commonly cited as
illustrating the pressure even on men of means. It began in the second
century. See Dig L 1 § 38⁶, 2 § 1 [Ulpian], 4 § 14⁶ [Callistratus citing
Hadrian], and many other passages. Notable is L 4 § 4¹ _honores qui
indicuntur_ [Ulpian].

[1815] This topic is the subject of Churchill Babington’s Hulsean
dissertation, Cambridge 1846. I learn that a pamphlet by Brecht,
_Sklaverei und Christentum_, takes a less favourable view, but have not
seen it. The survival of the colonate and its heavy burdens in the early
Middle Age are treated by de Coulanges, particularly in connexion with
the estates of the Church.

[1816] The slow progress of emancipation is referred to by E Meyer _Kl
Schr_ p 178, of course from a very different point of view. He mentions
that slavery was not completely forbidden in Prussia till 1857, and is
against its abolition in German colonies. Seeley in his _Life of Stein_
points out that the armies of Frederic the Great were mainly recruited
from serfs.

[1817] The Turk and his Rayahs furnishes a very striking illustration.

[1818] E Meyer, _Kl Schr_ p 188.

[1819] Since writing this section I have found in Prof Bury’s _Idea of
Progress_ pp 269-70 a passage which seems to justify the objection here
raised, though it occurs in a different connexion.

[1820] It is perhaps hardly necessary to refer to the great economic
disturbance caused by the Black Death in fourteenth century England.

[1821] John Spargo, _Bolshevism, the enemy of political and industrial
Democracy_. London, J Murray 1919. I think I may accept the author’s
evidence on the points here referred to, confirmed as it is by other
observers. See his remarks pp 69, 156, 275, 278, in particular. That the
same sharp distinction between peasant and wage-earner is drawn by the
Socialists in other countries also, and is to them a stumbling-block, is
clearly to be seen in King and Okey’s _Italy today_. See appendix.

[1822] A remarkable article in the _Times_ of 10 May 1920 describes
the influences tending in the opposite direction in the United States,
particularly the workman’s prospect of proprietorship.

[1823] For the survival of the colonate in the West see de Coulanges pp
145-86.

[1824] See Krumbacher’s history of Byzantine Literature in Iwan Müller’s
Handbuch, and Oder’s article in Pauly-Wissowa.

[1825] Varro _RR_ I 17 §§ 3, 4.

[1826] In the _Journal of Hellenic Studies_ 1910 and 1912. There the
views of Zachariä are discussed.

[1827] The truth seems to be that serfage had never become so widespread
in the East as in the West, as Mr Bouchier, _Syria as a Roman Province_ p
181, points out.

[1828] Vol II pp 418-421.

[1829] Sir W. Herringham, _A Physician in France_, pp 167-8 on Peasantry
as a strength to the State.




INDICES

_Where the reference is less direct, the figure is given in brackets_


I GENERAL

  =Agriculture, etc.=
    Accommodation-labour, mutual between neighbours, 170, 333-4
    Accommodation land, 190-1
    Aqueducts, 293-6
    asses, 107, 330, 334, 400, 422
    contempt for, 12, 69, 145-7, 160, 334
    Decay of, general, 337, 383, 387, 393
    Decay of, in Greece, 11, 96, 104, 127, 129, 132, 300 foll.
    Decay of, in Italy, 11, 14, 143-4, 147, 154 foll., 163, 174,
        209-10, 250-1, 265, 271-2, 281 foll., 288, 299, 358, 365, 404
        foll.
    Delegation of management, 432-3
    growth of distaste for, 42, [79], 88, [119], 124, 251, [278], 302
    Importance and recognized value of, 3, 5, 6, 8-11, 82, 141, 200,
        204-6, 212, 226, [280], 283, 400, 437, 444
    improved by knowledge of foreign countries, 179, [251]
    Industrializing of, 146-7, 150-1, 168-9, 203-4, 445, 447, 452
    in Peloponnesus, 30, 49, 50, [69], 82, 118, 120, 122-3, 128-9
    in the East, 303-5
    Landed peasantry not ‘proletarian’, 457-8
    Military point of view, 3, 8-11, 64-5, 74-5, 122, [128], 132, 133,
        147, 152, 163, 166, 176, 213-4, 283, 395-7, 438, 440
    Moral or civic point of view, 3, 11, 31, 64, 70, 83, 96, 107-8,
        124, 133, 135 foll., 166, 213, [277 foll.], 281 foll., 302,
        439-40, 445, 458
    need of capital, 47, [67], 83, 104, 144, 154, 174, 200-1, 204,
        [225], 250, 255, 320, 345, 365
    problem of food-supply, 3, 9, 14, 15, [19], 29, 30, 47, 48, 62, 66,
        77, 81, 87, 92, 96, 118-9, 132, 208, 211, 283, 288, 309, [326],
        332, [337], 339, 347, 357-8, 375, 379, 382-4, 387-98, 403,
        406-8, 411-2, 416, 427-8, 460-1
    Property and proprietary rights, 436
    Punic, 151, 164, [168], [179], 203-4, [282], 353
    remunerative or not, 14, 41, 83, 107, 111, 154-60, 166, 169, 174,
        186, [193], 201, 205, 252-3, [268], [277], 284, 306, 308-10,
        318, 320-2, 351, 365, 404-5


  Barbarian and Greek, 27, 28, 31-2, 34, 54-5, 78-9, [112], 113, [164]

  Barbarian lords and Roman subjects, 427

  Barbarians and the Roman army, 14, 210, 270, 273, 292, 339, 382, 387,
        397, 413-4, 417-8

  Barbarians, fertility of, 382

  Barbarians, settlement of, within Roman Empire, 337-8, 340, 360, 384,
        414-5, 416, 426, 431

  Bee-keeping, 184, 228, 230, [266], 309

  Beggars, 18, 19, 23, 25, 72, 243, 392

  Book-keeping on great estates, 249-50, 258-9, [264], 335, 368

  Bucolic poetry, 115-6, 218-20, 280


  Capitalism and employment of labour, 2, 36, 48, 55, 57-8, 70-1, 107,
        150, 151-2, 156 foll., 173, 220, 254, 302, 441, 443, 454-6

  Capitalism, growth of, 13, 25, 33, 36, 47-8, 49, 58, 70, 76, 83,
        [106], 129, 142-4, 212, 282, 288 foll., 314

  Capitalist influence hostile to free peasantry, 151-2, 201, [212],
        [297]

  Capitalist profiteers, 403

  cases, query, hypothetical?, 264, 304-5

  Caste and gild system of later Roman Empire, 210, 212, [376-7], 383,
        389-91, 396, 405, 413, 423, 451

  Census, the later Imperial, 388, 390, 420-2, 431

  Centralization, bureaucratic, 379-80, 381, 384

  Cereal crops, 19, 47-8, 81, 104, 107, 111, [118], [121], 154, 174,
        249, [253], 266-7, 283-4, 291, 303, 309, 350, 352, 375, 388,
        403, 406, 412, [428-9], 461, 463

  Charcoal, 42, 64

  Charitable institutions, 271, 273, 296, 324

  Charity, private, 403

  Christianity, influence of, 410-1, 420, 422-3, 426-32, [435], 449
        foll.

  Citizen and alien, 32, 36, 47, 48, 66, 96-7, 301, 314, 329

  Citizens as such not producers, 102

  Citizens, new, incorporation of, 126-7, 149, 153, 271, 288, 389, [444]

  Citizenship, 86, 92, 94, 98, 113-4, 120, 301-2, 389, 431, 444

  City and country, 9, 13, 24, 31-2, 40, 43-4, 48, 49, 63, 83, 89, 90,
        108-9, 115-6, 124-5, 145-6, 153, 184, [200], 217, 222, 235-6,
        251, 278-9, 301-2, 306, 308, 332, 400, 409, 429

  City and State, 380

  Cleruchies, 39, 41-2, 51-2, 81, 83, 105-6, [120]

  Clients [πελάται, _clientes_], 25, 134, [150], [167], 243, 314, 431,
        433

  Colonies, 26-7, 51, 67, 72, 76, 83, 87-8, 152, 174, 207, 270, [272],
        273-5

  Commerce and seafaring, 19, 23, 39, 114, 215, 288, 290, 309, 347,
        381, 391, 403, 412

  Commerce restricted, 77, 92, 96, [98], 100, 102, [142], [290]

  Communistic schemes and legends, 41, 45, 89, 92, 120, 218, 232, 236,
        248, [459]

  Confiscation and redistribution, 67, [70], 72, [88], 89, 128, 155-6,
        176-7, 178-9, 193, 200, 203, [225], 234, 236, 240

  Continuity of occupation, importance of, 207-8, 252-3, 255, 344-5,
        347, 355-6, 377, 383-4

  Corn-dealers, 81, 403

  Corn trade (Euxine), 31, [39], 81, 104-5

  Cosmopolitanism, 113-4, [187], 232, 271, [288]

  Country carts, 39, 400

  Country houses, 51, 82, 106, 108-9, 124, 157, [164], 165-6, 201, 224,
        235, 246, 310, 312, 366, 427-9

  Country life idealized, desire of, 43, [115], 124-5, 200-1, 215, 217,
        222, [230], 234-6, 280, [302-3], 417, 429

  Craftsman as employer, 2, [48], [51], 172-3, [385], 441, 446

  Crops, dealers in, 111, 171, 322, 375

  Crops, hanging, sale of, 171, 265, 284, 322

  Crops, variety in, movement towards, 203, 266

  Cultivation etc. by contract, 140, 166, 171-3, [180], 186, 264-5

  Cultivation, intensive, 231, 265, [291]

  Cultivation, movements to extend or maintain, 126-7, [207-8], 211-2,
        [272], [301], 337-8, 340, 349-52, 357, [383], 387, 394


  Damage, responsibility for, 363, 366, 373-4

  Debt, pressure of, 22, 25, 133-4, 144, 155, [209], 321, 430, 436-7

  Devastation of farms in war, 31, 38, 40, 43, [84], 104, 118, 133,
        136, 139, 144, 410-1, 412

  Differentiation of soldier and farmer, 210, 382, 417-8

  Digging, 35, 46, 116, 172, 186, 261, 282, 317

  Dogs, 23, 331, 372

  Domains, imperial, 207, 209, 337, 342-58, 377-8

  Domestication of animals, 15, 32, 433-4

  Drainage, 366


  East and West, 409, 460-4

  Education, 68-9, 72-3, 76, 101

  Emigration of working farmers (?), 207, 256, [272], 274-5, [293],
        348-9

  =Estates=
    abroad, 39, 51-2, 81, 83-4, 106, 207, 214, 248-9, 251, 281-2,
        [291], 298, [301], 309, 319, 341, 348, 353-4, 405
    and boundaries, 17, 108, 174-5, 190, 331
    as ‘Peculiars’, 354, 377, 392-3
    division of, 22, 190-1, 256
    Great, growth of, in Italy, 126, 143-4, 147, 152-3, 154, 165, 201,
        203, 205, 248, 251, 256, 263, 281-3, 297, 314, [354]
    Large and small, 46, 47, 51, 88, 106-7, 119, 125, 129, 138, 141-4,
        [166], 182, 196, 201, 214, 281-4, 296-7, 334
    Letting to tenants, 14, 36, 39, 52, 82-3, 84, 106, 111, [125],
        157-8, 160-1, 167, 177, 183, 191, 194-5, 198, 201-2, 208, 211,
        216, 224, 233-5, 246-7, 252-7, 264, 277, 280, 297-9, 303,
        307-8, 320-1, 325, 355, 358-9, 362 foll., 367-8, 376, 390, 433,
        450, 463
    Management by owner, 13, 57-8, 82, 106, [146], 167, 170-1, 224,
        [250-1], 284, [319], 325
    Management by owner’s steward, 13, [33], 36, 51, 57-60, 88, 106,
        116, 124, 140, 153, 158-60, 168, 186, 194, 224, 251-3, 256
        foll., 297 foll., 304, 321, 325, 335, 343, 353, 367-8, 461
    Mixed, 82, [83], 106, 108, [155], 169, [201], 310
    of _collegia_, 295
    retain names of former owners, 343
    Small, profits on, 160, 184, 230, 284, 306
    Suburban, 109, 128, 164, 248, 294-5, 306, 312

  Eugenics, 72-3, [90], 93

  Evidence, lack of, from working farmer or labourer, 4, 374, [429-30],
        454

  Experiments, 258


  Fallows and rotation of crops, 291

  Familiar details, tendency of writers to omit, 16, 44, 136, 140,
        213-4, 379

  Farm-equipment found by landlord, 216, 255, 297-9, 320-1, 344-5,
        364-5, 367

  Farmer and politics, 11, 12, 36, 40-4, 49, 70, 89, 90, 302

  Farmer as man of substance, 39-40, 41, 46, 104

  Farmer-heroes, Roman, 135 foll., 145-6, 197, 213, 232, 281, 313, 328,
        415, 418, 445

  Farmer not a soldier, 74, [98], 101, 210, 313, [316], 396-8, 417

  Farmer rather a seller than a buyer, 42, 167, [185]

  Farmers’ capital mostly fixed, 46, 47, 104, [193]

  Farmers required to be resident, 204-5, 208, 297, 383-4

  Farmers resident in the city, 33, 51, 82

  Farm-hands as oarsmen, 90, 95, 183

  Farming, fancy, 109, 179, 282, 308-10

  Farming, high or scientific, 98-9, 122, 179, [181], 201, 286

  Farming means unremitting attention and toil, 22, 23, [152], 159-60,
        166, [197], 218, 222, 251, 321, 451

  Farm slaves barbarians, 63, 92, 94, 124, [292], [325], 337

  Farm tenants and their burdens, 14, [131], [157-8], 183, 195, 197,
        209, 211, 254, 377-8, 397, 415

  Figs, 45, 81, 108, 266, 283, 303, [463]

  Financial interests, power of, 152

  Financial system and motives of later Roman Empire, 211-2, [225],
        346, 348, 354-5, 375-8, 381-3, 388 foll., 394, 401, 410 foll.,
        427

  Fires, 249, 374, 428

  Firewood, 42, 107, 111, [115], 118, 252, 309, 388, 408

  Flocks and herds (grazing and breeding), 16, 19, 20, 29, 81, 88, 90,
        115-6, 121, 154, 165, 171, 174, 179, 266, 278, 301, 303, 309,
        [372], 388, 406, 429, 448

  Floods, 108, 312, 322, 374

  Flower gardens, 108-9

  Food, imported, 39, 47, 48, 69, 77, 81, 104, 119, 154, 174, 184, 266,
        283, 288, 309, 326, 347, 358, 403, 416

  Foods, 19, 20, 24, 25, 45, 137, 283, 403

  Fortified homesteads, 412-3, 429

  Free craftsmen employed by farmer, 172-3, 184, [462]

  Freedmen (German), 292

  Freedmen (Greek), 80, 82, 85, [123]

  Freedmen (Roman), 127, [160], 168-9, 183, 188, 192-3, 196-7, 201,
        213, 234, 236, 243, 244, 264, 271, 284, [288], 290-1, 300, 312,
        314-5, 318, [334], 379, [429]

  Freedom, its local value, 21, 137

  Fruit-trees and orchards, 19, 20, 25, 127-8, 139, [178], 230, 344,
        350, 421


  Goats, 47, 84, 183

  Granaries, 107, [198], 249, 267, 288, 411-2, 429

  Greeks enslave Greeks, 27, 31, 55, 73, 112, 435


  Herdsmen and shepherds, etc., 16-7, 33, 35, 63, 84, 109, 115-6, 154,
        162, 179, 218-20, 301, 304, 310, 315, 448

  Highwaymen and brigands, 154, 160, 179, 191-2, 233, 323, 329, 342,
        372, 375, 392, 405

  Home or Manor Farm on estates, [161], [201], 216-7, 235, 246, 254-6,
        257, 298, 319, 342, 353, 355

  Horses, 33, 57-8, 120-1, 418-9

  Hunting, fishing, bird-catching, etc., 185, 307, 309, 319, 405


  Imperial jealousy of great private estates, 207, 301, 353, 387,
        392-3, 394-5

  Imperial taxation, crushing effect of, 301, [303], 336, 357, 381-4,
        387 foll., 393, 410 foll., 421-2, 424, 427

  Improvement by fire, 223

  Internal maladies of Roman Empire, 409 foll., 413

  Irrigation, 16, 246, 293

  Italian agriculture, pictures of, discussed, 178-9, [182-3], 200-1,
        214-8, 235, 251-3, 288, 404-6, [419]

  Italian agriculture, protection of, 157, [272]

  Italian land and taxation, 205, 212, [291], 358, 365, 388, 406

  Italian land, encouragement to invest in, 274, 289, 291, 297, 319

  Italian slaves in Italy, 137, 149, [160]


  Jealousy of wealth, 41, 44, 66, 70, 72, [76], 87, [109]

  Jurists as Ministers, 336


  =Land, etc.=
    as investment, 106, 144, 159, 165, 169, 190, 201, 225, 289 foll.,
        319-20, 365-6, 405
    as security, 143, 288-90, 296, 324, 326-7, [430]
    bought by capitalist speculators, 47, 57, 106, 142-4, 153, 191,
        [199], 238, [284], 353
    buying or selling of, 23, [47], 57, 84, 88, 106, 108-9, [119],
        [135-6], 143-4, 154, 167, 175, 190-1, 193, [200], 234-5, 238-9,
        251, 282, 284, 288 foll., 295, 305, 315, 318-20, 405, 428
    grabbing and monopoly, 67, 88, 120, 142-4, 165, 174, 190, 248-9,
        251, 282, 313-4, 438
    holding peasantry and military duty, 10, 14, 42, 89, 90, 132-4,
        138, 141-2, 148-9, 152-3, 175 foll., 198, 204, 213, 230, 313,
        [418], 438, 440
    hunger, 8, 52, 54, 87, 106, 128, 133, 135, 145, 174, [437]
    lots, κλῆροι, 20, 21, 22, 26, 39, 51-2, 67, 76-7, 88-9, 91, 94,
        120, 128, 133, 174, 177, 210, 441
    lots, sale of, forbidden, 88, [91], 175-6
    lots, small in early times, 135-6, 243, 281-3, 313
    lots, tradition of primitive equality, 75, 89, [91]
    mortgages on, etc., 25, [82], 88, 106-7, 109, 155, 288-90, 327,
        [430]
    neglect of poorer soils, 351
    owners, large, and war, 38, 39, 41
    owning and citizenship, 8, 14, 25, 31, 32, 36, 44, 57, 66-7, 70,
        77, 86, 94, 96, 97, 105-6, 127, 138, 148, 191, [313], 437, 440,
        444
    owning and residence, 51-2, 94, 106, 108-9, 124-5, 153, 165-6, 168,
        250-1, 256
    owning, prestige of, 13, 14, 39, 58, 106, 154-5, 157, 201, 205,
        235, 297, 358, 365-6, 438 foll.
    precarious tenure of, 20, 134, 167
    proud capitalists, 14, [47], 155, [169], 201, 235, 249-50, 282-3,
        290-1, 314, 332, 358
    public, 68, 94, 134-5, 143, [154], 165, 174-5, 177, 195, 197-8
    question of improvements, [166], 174, [176], 233-4, 252, [301],
        365-7
    regarded as property of the state, 204, [277], 303, [377]
    rent of, in money or kind, fixed or by quota, 26, 77, 252, 292,
        297, 303, 321, 332, 343-4, 346-7, 356, 365, 371, 376, [394],
        428, 433
    systems, foreign, 204-5, 210-1, 291-2
    tenure, questions of, 237-8, 272, [286]
    the classes concerned with it, 432-3
    value dependent on presence of labour, 60, [84], 122, 142, 144,
        [154], 170, 201, 256, [319], 320, 383, 393-5, 396
    various qualities, importance of, 25, [36], 41-2, 47, [63-4], 82-3,
        [108-9], 121, 139, 180, 186, 231, [239], [267], 365

  Landed peasantry, attempts to revive, 174-5, 186, 198, [200], 210,
        226, 231, 239, [251], 273, [315], [351]

  =Landlord=
    as tax-collector, 393-4
    can force tenant to cultivate properly, 253-4, 351, 363, 433
    distrains on defaulting tenants, 298, 320-1, 378
    duty to his tenant, 404
    duty to support his tenant’s interests, 404
    encroach on tenants’ rights, 246-7, [393]
    great, and politics, 153, 155, 157, 159, 160, 165, 207
    great, as protectors, 392, 393, 424
    great private, and imperial policy, 281-2, 301, 352-4, 366, [383],
        392-3, 394-5
    mad finance of, 154-5, 157, 289
    rights of, 363-4, 367, 394
    selfishness of, 294-6, 375, 405, 407
    the enterprising, glorified, 12, 58, [178-9], 284
    the town-bred man, 108, 200, [234]

  =Laws=
    Agrarian of 111 B.C., 143, 175
    Claudian, 142, [165], [169]
    Codes, Theodosian and Justinian. See under list of passages cited
    Digest. See under list of passages cited
    Imperial by-laws, 343 foll., 346, 349, 352, 354
    Imperial rescripts and constitutions, 346-7, [352], 360-1, 372,
        376, 378, 386-7, 431
    Julian (of Caesar), 177, 288
    Jurists separately cited, 293, 333, 351
    Law appealed to, [329], 331, 402
    Law as evidence, 131, 361-2, 399
    Licinian, 131, 141, 174
    municipal charters, 354
    of Gortyn, 436
    on manumission, 333
    Sempronian (of Gracchi), 175
    Servilian (of Rullus), 177, 198
    Twelve Tables, 283

  Leases, perpetual, 359, 376

  Leisure for citizens, 77-8, 93-4, 97, 102, [188], 454

  Lime, 172, 388, 408

  Limitation of scope, 6, 132

  Literary evidence, nature and value of, 5, 6, 30, 131, 136 foll.,
        142-4, 145-8, 160, 187-8, 199-201, 213-7, 218 foll., 267-9,
        281, 286-7, 300 foll., 303 foll., 305 foll., 317 foll., 325,
        328, 399, 402, 409, 415, 417, 420, 422-3, 426 foll., 454

  Loans by the state to landlords, 225, 273, 326

  Local conditions, importance of, 255, 267, 282, 319-20, 372, 388

  Local custom, recognition of, [345], 364-5, 367

  Local government, questions of, 379-80

  Luxury and extravagance, 381

  Luxury, its effect on farming, 179, 246, 266, [306, 308-10], 365-6


  Malarious lands, 180, 182, 253, [462]

  Manufacture of articles on the farm, 185, [219], [227], 262

  Manufactures, 53, [83], 381, 441

  Manuring, 44, 174, 266, 284

  Market gardens, 184, 231, 265, 295-6, 306, 330, 332

  Markets, urban, 306, 308-9

  Master’s eye, importance of, 57-9, 116, 166, 170-1, 194, 243, [251],
        252-3, 266, 282

  Metics, 49, 71, [86], 97, 98

  Migration, power of, the mark of freedom, 386, 444, 451

  =Military=
    Class control [and plunder] farmers, 26-8, 68, 91-2, [94], 101,
        [103], [104], 436
    Colonies and settlement of discharged soldiers on land, 10, 11, 29,
        155-6, 176-7, 179, 210, 214-5, 219, [223], 234, 236, 238, 240,
        251, 274-5, 293
    Gymnastics and military service, 100-1, 128, 316
    License and outrages, 104, 160, 219, [313, 315], 330, 342, 374,
        378, 405, 422-3
    Mercenary soldiers, 10, 50, 53-4, 64-5, 71, 95, 103-4, 112-3, 116,
        119, 125, 132, 292, 339
    Professionalism, growth of, 13, [54], 69, [74], 95, 100, 153, 177,
        186, 210, 313, 316, 417
    Service unpopular and evaded, 41, 71, 103, 324, 326
    Substitutes, 324, 396
    Systems, 9-11, 27, [97-8], 101, 122, 128, 132-3, 138-9, 152-3,
        175-7, 186, 209-10, [225], 323-4, 339, [341], 396-7, 407,
        413-4, 417, [423], 438
    Tenure of barbarian colonists, 273, 339-40, 415
    Veterans, retired, as local magnates, 400, 402

  Milk and cheese, 265, 309

  Mining and quarrying, 51, 59, 108, [192], 443, 446-7

  Money-values, difficulty in ascertaining, 375, 387-8

  Moral causes of Imperial decline, 423-6

  Mules, 24, 33, 400, 422

  Municipal estates, 207, 255, 359, 375-7, 400

  Municipalities and benefactors, 271, 324, 381, [408]

  Municipalities as taxation-centres, 380-1, 390, 392, 401, [408], 421,
        425

  Municipalities, jealousy between, 380, 401 408-9

  Municipalities, local senators and magistrates of, 217, 293, 376,
        390, 400-1

  Municipal jurisdictions, 354, 380, 399 foll.

  Municipal offices shirked, 377, 381, 392, [401], 425

  Music, 98, 123


  Nationalization of aliens, [437], 444

  New Hellenism, 112-4, 164, 275-6


  Official favours and corruption, 357, 389-91, 403-7, 409, 410-1,
        413-4, 421-2, 425

  Old age, state-relief in, 80

  Olives and oil, 19, 24, 42, 46, 47-8, 81, 84, 104, 108, 171-2, 174,
        266, 283-4, 303, 350, 352, 406, 428, [463]

  Oriental and other foreign influences, 6, 7, 204-8, 210-1, 314

  Oriental Greeks, 113, 153, 271, 379

  Oxen, 16, 22, 24, 44, 47, 99, 172, 180, [197], 214, 228-9, 231, 243,
        249, 253, 261, 282, 284, 286, 331, 364, 398, 433-4, 438


  Patrons of villages, 212, 400-1, 425

  Payment in kind, not in debased currency, 211, [359-60], 384, 388

  Peasant-farmer, hard life of, 25, 35-6, [47], 83, 90, 213, 222,
        [234], 235, [313], [418]

  Peasant-farmer, retirement of, 237

  Penal servitude, 326

  Pigs, 372, 388

  Pitch-works, 192

  Plantation system, 162, 165, 201, 203, 239, 297, 443

  Ploughing, 16, 19, 22-4, 33, 116, [185], 218, 261, 278, 284, 334

  Police, rural, no regular force, 189, 311, 323, 372, 448

  Poor freemen, their trials, 63, 125, 199, 302

  Populations, forced transfer of, 113

  Post, Imperial [_cursus publicus_], 378, 391, 397

  Poultry, 262-3, 309

  Poverty and discontent, 33-4, 38, 41, 66, 70, [199]

  Poverty, dread of, a stimulus, 22, 23, 25, 29, 36, [45], 46, 47-8

  Poverty in Greece, 29, 53, 54, 302, 329

  Poverty no reproach, 23, 111, [135 foll.], 302

  Private property in land, growth of, 143-4, 174-5, 203, 205, 313,
        436-8

  Property, private, forbidden, 73, 75

  Provincial land, tenure of, 293, 303, 351, [358]

  Public opinion, no force of, in Roman Empire, 357, 389


  Reaping, 16, 22-4, 108-10, 180, 278

  Reaping machine, 398

  Reclamation encouraged by temporary exemption from rent or taxes,
        337, 344, 349-50

  Religion, 18, 19, 23, 44-5, 120, 170, 258, 260, 314, [404], 434, 444,
        448

  Remission of dues to relieve distress, 390-1

  Rent, arrears of, [161], 209, 256, 298, 320-1, 365, 404

  Repetitions unavoidable, 5

  Representative government unknown, 66, [89]

  Restoration of exiles, effects of, 119, 122, 128

  Rich and poor, 90, 94, 112, 120, 129, 205, 271, 273, 295, 302, 306,
        329, 331-2, 391, 400, 403-4, 410, 424-5

  Rights of way, watercourses, etc., 108, [258], 294-5, 373

  Roads, 267, 295, 391, 429

  Roads, public, work on, 173, 378, 391

  Roman Empire a machine, 381-2, 384, 425, [427], 451

  Roman Empire, stagnation in, 398, 451

  Roman power of assimilation, failing, 270-1, 338, 340

  Roman subjects prefer Barbarian rule, 423-4

  Rural disputes and affrays, 188-91, 315, 372-4, [405]


  Self-help, duty of, 23

  Sheep, 109, 309

  =Slavery, Labour, Serfdom, etc.=
    Abolitionism, a modern movement, 34, 84, 445 foll.
    Apprenticeship, 79
    Competition of slave labour with free, [48], [59], 71, 85, 124,
        [131], 157, 302, 441, [443]
    Eunuchs, 28, 310
    Handicraftsmen, 16, 18, 23, 25, 28, 35, 62, 68, [73], 88, 144, 184,
        [193], 199, 245, 437-8, 441
    Handicraftsmen, free, their difficulties, 302
    Harbouring runaways, 375, [394], 404
    Hired labourers not αὐτουργοί, 12, 13
    Itinerant labourers, jobbing gangs of, 14, [110], 173, 222, 256,
        327, 443
    Journeyman contrasted with independent craftsman, 2, 35, [48], 452,
        455
    Labour, attempts to entice it from neighbours, 394
    Labour despised, 19, 22, 28, 59, 64, 78, 80, 85, 188, 193, 245,
        287, 359, [438], 440, 442, 444-5, 452
    Labour, division of, 12, 15, 99
    Labourer goes with the land, 94, [131], [211], 319-20, [360-1],
        368, [393-5]
    Labourer, status of, often uncertain, 3, 33, 110-1, 117, 128, 193,
        218-21, 222, 227-8, 256, 442-3
    Labour for daily bread, 55-6, 58, 62, 111, [175], 199, 204, 313,
        327, 441
    Labour, for self or for another, 12-15, 25, 144, 148, 299, [327],
        370, 399, [436], 438-44, 445, 458
    Labour glorified, 231, 277-80
    Labour good for the labourer, 56, 58, 64, 277-80, 316-7
    Labour in discharge of debt, 161, 180, 182, 263, 437
    Labour not degrading, 16, 19, 23, [64], 111, 149, 246, 277-9
    Labour, personal, of working farmer, (see αὐτουργία), 23-4, 25, 30,
        36, 44, 45, 58, 86, 123, 128, 136, 148-9, [165], 180, [184],
        197, 208, 213-4, [216], 226, 230-1, 234, [243], [255], 283,
        304, [325], 332, 345, 347, 353, [371], 395, 439 foll., [463]
    Labour question fundamental, 211-2, 237, 239-40, 268, 287, [344],
        394 foll., 458
    Labour, rustic, as a punishment, 124-5, 145-6, [167], 248, 444
    Labour, rustic, as healthy exercise, 236, 277-80, 316-7, 440
    Labour-services of tenants due without wage, 161, [201-2], [209],
        211, 254, [256], 257, [265], 298, 342, 344-6, 348, 351, 353-4,
        359, 383-4
    Later serf-colonate a result of gradual change, 211-2, 254-6, 257,
        333, 356, 359, 361, 378 foll., [386], 393-4, 424-5, 436, 450
    Manual labour and direction, 12, 13, 20, 23-4, 35, 57-60, 124-5,
        158, 176, 181, 258, 299, 316, 319, 371, 395, 445, 455, 458
    Occasional labour, 15, 53, 85, 108, 111, 157, 161, 166, 180 foll.,
        186, 201, [254], 265, 342, 344-5, 346, 348, 359, 434, 443, 455
    Odd jobs, porterage, etc., 46, 327
    Overseers, etc., 51, [57], 59, 60, 88, 97, 165, 181, 261, 321, 404,
        443, 447, 462
    Quasi-slavery of free workers, 99, 144, 188, 441 foll.
    Self-disposal, 441, 443-4, 451, 453, 456
    Serfage and slavery confused, 84, 86, 292
    Serfage distinct from slavery or caste-system, 26-7, [131], 360-1,
        436
    Serf-colonate failing, 460, [463], 464
    Serf-cultivators, 26-8, 30, 37, 50, 60, 69, 75, 77, 82, 84, 87, 92,
        127, [131], 292, 361, 431, 436
    Serfdom is practically slavery, 425, [431]
    Serf employed in war, 37, 75, 95
    Slave artisans and craftsmen, 51, 55, 57, 184, 441, 446
    Slave as fellow-man, 34, 56, 62, 113, 245, [260], 323, 328, 445
    Slave brigands, 154, 189-92, 392, 448
    Slave-gangs, not to be homogeneous, 77, 94, 162, 181-2
    Slave-gangs, special foremen of, 158, 185, 260
    Slave insurrections, 162, 175, 177, 181, 191, 198, 448
    Slave-labour always available, 157, 174-5, 239, [285-6], 446, 455
    Slave-labour, excess of, attempt to lessen, [131]
    Slave-labour, specializing of, on estates, 203, 261, 265, 461
    Slave-labour untrustworthy and wasteful, 97, 111, 157, 180 foll.,
        186, 253, 283, 285, 319, 355, [398], 417, 419, 445, 455
    Slave not a person, 44, [57], 77, 401
    Slave not enrolled in army, 175, [186], 323-4, [396]
    Slave philosophers, 327
    Slave-qualities, 34, 56, 180-1, 259
    Slavery, absolute power of master, 18, 56-7, 158-9, 167, 244, 446
    Slavery and labour in general, 2, 3, 15, 16, 34, [46], 48, 78,
        110-2, 135-8, 161, 170, 180-2, 186, 216, 222, 230-1, 239, 281,
        285, 299, 304, 316, [383], 385, 395, 429, 433-5, 440 foll.,
        444-5, 455
    Slavery, attempts to justify, 79, 439
    Slavery, domestic, 8, 26, 30, [39], 61, [80], 97, [109], [123],
        124, 137, 221, 231, 244, 249-50, 285, 309-10, 311, 318, 429,
        431, 441-2, 446
    Slavery from gambling debt, 291
    Slavery, growth of humaner views on, 61-2, [79], 167, 182, 185,
        [221], [229], 242-3, 244-5, [260-1], [285], 310-1, 317, 323,
        326-8, 438, 445
    Slavery ignored, 237-40
    Slavery, industrial, 8, 51, 53, 55, [80], 123, [137], 335, 441
    Slavery, its economic success or failure, 156 foll., 283, 285, 323,
        370, [434], 442, 445
    Slavery justified, 34, 78-9, 100, 439, 442
    Slavery, kidnapping, 20, 53, 55, 79, 122, 160, 243, 263, [323],
        326, [329]
    Slavery, legends of none in early times, 15, 30, 62, 123, 439, [452]
    Slavery of debtor to creditor, 25, [134], 263, 269, 436-7, [438],
        442
    Slavery, origin of, 15, 17, 78, 236-7, 434, 446
    Slavery originally on small scale and domestic in character, 137,
        149, [228], [231], 243, 245, 285, 434-5, 446
    Slavery, query, assumed, 16, 17, 20, 30, 32, 37, 44, 48, 68, 74-5,
        84, 136, 213-4, 220, 304, 368, 445
    Slavery, question of manumission, 21, 38, 58, 62, 79, 80, 84, 97,
        122, 123-4, 129, 149, 158, [168], 182, 196, [218], 219, 260,
        263, [288], 311-2, 318, 326, 333-4, 368, 369, 371, 431, 442-3,
        446-7
    Slavery recognized as basis of social and economic system, 45, 56,
        60, 77-8, 99, 100, 102, [141-2], 192, 239, 256, 285-6, 310
    Slavery, rustic, 8, 9, 20, 23-4, 25, [30], 37, [39], 44-5, 46-7,
        50-2, 57-9, 63-4, [68], 77, 79, 80, 84, 87, 97, 106-110, 116-7,
        122, 124, [129], 135-8, 144 foll., 151-4, 158, 160-2, 165
        foll., 170 foll., 174 foll., 180 foll., 184 foll., 203, [208],
        214, 216-7, 222, 227-33, 237, 240, 242-3, 258-63, 281, 285,
        299, 310-1, 315, 321, 325, 333-4, 337, 340, 341-2, 345, 353,
        355, 363-4, 369, 387, 394, 404, 414, 429, 435, 443-4, 455,
        461-2, 464
    Slavery, secondary (slaves of slaves), 18, [259]
    Slavery, the relation questioned, 33-5, 56, 113, 244, [302], [335],
        446
    Slavery unknown among the gods, 35
    Slavery, was it the basis of ‘classical’ civilization?, 7, 8, 15,
        453, 455
    Slaves acquire property, [see _peculium_], 38, 58, 80, 167-8,
        181-2, 219, 250, 263, 318, 369, 442
    Slaves and freemen work side by side, 48, 63, 135-8, [140], 149,
        171-3, 180 foll., 444-5
    Slaves as gladiators, 162, 189, 328
    Slaves as informers, danger from, 84, 244, [334]
    Slaves as oarsmen, 53, 90, 95, 122, 326
    Slaves as property, 17, 18, [55], 56-7, 77, 82, 122, 155, 167, 172,
        182, 189, [221], 311, 315, 369-70, 442-3
    Slaves as war-booty, 10, 17, 27, 37, 53, 55, 120, 122, 129, 136,
        153, 176, 236-7, 310, 325, 337, 387
    Slaves a worry to masters, 97, 124, 285
    Slaves brought on the stage, 34, 62, 113
    Slaves, care of their health, 77, 161, 185, 262, 442, 462
    Slaves, condition of, 17, 18, 20, 21, 56-7, 311, 324, 370-1
    Slaves, contractors’ gangs of, 108, 110, 166, 214
    Slaves, cruel punishment of, 196, 244, 249, 443
    Slaves, deliberate breeding of, 161, [169], 181, [249], 257, 260,
        262, 311-2
    Slaves employed in business and professions, 97, 192, 305, 446
    Slaves employed in hunting, 405
    Slaves, female, 17, 18, 24, 45, 57, 168, 181, 221, 231, 257-8, 260,
        262, 307, 318, 364, 431
    Slaves, food, lodging and dress of, 20, 23-4, 25, 45, [57], 116,
        154, 157, 171-2, 181, [193], 258, 260, 309, [441]
    Slaves, good health of, 317, 440
    Slaves, home-born [οἰκογενεῖς, _vernae_], 129, 169, 181, 235, 262,
        311-2, 430-1
    Slaves let out for service at a rent, 38, 39, 61, 64, 80, 110,
        [117], 170, 193, 247, 256, 370-1, 442-3
    Slaves liable for masters’ safety, 244, 323
    Slaves, loyalty of, 18, 20, 34, 61, 240
    Slaves, masters responsible for their vices, 56-8, 61, 77, 245
    Slaves, moral qualities needed in, 56-8, [61], 77, [97], [181-2],
        196, 259-61, 323
    Slaves, names of, 45, 63-4, 137, 213, 285
    Slaves not αὐτουργοί, 12, 13, 439
    Slaves of _publicani_, 151, 188, 192
    Slaves, old age of, 80, 97, 158, 167, 182, 263, 326, 443, 447
    Slaves, public, 68, 86, 91, [400], 446
    Slaves, punishment of, interrupted by war, 45
    Slaves, restriction on sale of, 394
    Slaves, rewards of, better than punishments, 181-2, [185]
    Slaves, runaway, 50-1, 158, 192, 375, 404, 435, [447]
    Slaves serving in war, 10, 122, 129, 142, [162], 183, [323-4], 396,
        407
    Slaves, supply of, reduced, or rise in price of, 41, 117, 141-2,
        160-1, 162, [204], 208, 210, 257, 298, 310, 340, 344, 351,
        [354], [375], 387, 450
    Slaves, torture of, 110, 421
    Slaves, training of, 57, 169, 181-2, [258], 260
    Slaves unruly, 38, 78, 181, [260], [310]
    Slave-tenant or _métayer_ a quasi-partner, 298-9, [466]
    Slave-tenants, 257, 299, [307], 367-8, 369, 371, [393], [404], 450
    Slave-trade, 17, 18, 20, 25, 53, 55, 57, 61, 79, 87, 112, 122, 137,
        153-4, [169], 176, 210, 236, [242], 256, [259], 291-2, 310,
        325-6, 327, 329, 414, 435, 446
    Unskilled labour (‘hands’), 39, 99, 170, 172, [180-1], 188, 193,
        227, 261, 442 foll.
    Wage-earning, 3, 12, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 23, 24, 25, 29, 34,
        35, 44, 46, [53], 58-9, 61-4, 78-9, [88], 109-10, 117, 125,
        140, 144-5, 150, 157-8, [160], 170-3, 175-6, 180, 182, 186,
        188, 193, 199, 200-1, 216, 222, 235, 256, 287, 304-5, [313],
        327, [344], [359], 370, 385, 434, 441 foll., 452, 456-9
    Wage-labour for special work, 46, [110], 111, 125, 157, 171-3, 180,
        182, 186, [202], 266
    Wage, legal right to, 304

  Small cultivating owners in Roman Empire, 341, 346, 390

  Small holdings of state tenants, 177, 198

  Small landholders persecuted by big neighbours, 144, 242, 248, 251,
        283, 315, 330-1, 372, 467

  Soldiers as practical farmers, 184, 340

  Soldiers driven to farm-work, 53, [90], 147-8

  Specialization in politics, 69, 72-5, 92-3, 98, 102

  Squatters on waste land, 230, 272, 300 foll., [337], 349-52, 357, 428

  State-contracts, 83, 142, 151-2, 187, 192, 366, 376

  State-pay for public duties, 34, 38, 46, 47, 83, 87, 88, [120], 441

  Steward a slave, 59, 97, [116], 124, 140, 153, 158-9, 166, 170-1,
        186, 195-6, 216-7, 224, 242, 257-9, 264, [368], 443

  Steward (_vilicus_) as tenant of a farm, 299, [307], 367-8

  Steward directing free workers or overseeing tenants, [see
        _procurator_], 173, 216, 264

  Steward, the interest of, 153-4, 158-9, 166, 254, 443, 447

  Stoicism and Stoics, 187, 193, 242, 244-6, 275 foll., 310, 442, 449


  Tax-farming system superseded, 206

  Tenancies, beneficial, 143, 376

  Tenancies, large, not common, 298, 343-4

  Tenancy a contract-relation regulated by law, 208-9, 246-7, 252-7,
        297-9, 321, 345, 362 foll., 433

  Tenant, claims of, 363-4, 374, [466]

  Tenants find sureties, 345, 363

  Tenants, good, hard to find, 208-9, 252-6, 298-9, 320-1, 367, 369, 450

  Tenants-in-chief as rent and tax collectors, 343, 355

  Tenants-in-chief, holding of the state [Middlemen], 195, 207-8, 209,
        211-2, 343-53, 356, 358-9

  Tenants-in-chief oppress sub-tenants, 346, 348, 354-7, 359, 384

  Tenants-in-chief subletting to small farmers, 195, 197, 208-9, 211-2,
        [340], [342], 343 foll., 353, 355, 376-7, [405]

  Tenants, interest of Imperial government in their welfare, 394,
        397-8, 400

  Tenant’s property pledged to landlord, 363, 368

  Tenant, the town-bred man, 254

  Threshing, 16, 24, 278

  Tillage by Mattock, 214, 284, 313, [316]

  Tillage, the appliances of, 180, 197, 303

  Timber, 39, 96, 118, 227, 320

  Tombs on estates, [41], 109, 312

  Transport as an element of cost, 391

  Transport by road or river, 267, 322


  Upkeep, importance of, 262, 365


  Veterinary treatment, 228, 418

  Village communities, 134, 291, 437-8 [463]

  Vines, 19, 24, [43], 47-8, 81, 104, 107-8, 111, 121, 139, [157], 172,
        174, 185-6, 261, 266, 283-4, 303, 308, 320-2, 352, 406, 416,
        421, 428, [463]

  Voluntary action, its limits in ancient world, 440-4


  War and peace, 67, 89, [91], 95, 100, 102

  Wayfarers, nuisance from, 267

  Weather-wisdom, 31-2

  Wine, use of, 19, 42, 283, 388


II LIST OF WORDS AND PHRASES


A. GREEK

  ἀγορά, 101

  ἄγροικος, 63, 117

  ἀγρονόμοι, 79

  ἄκληρος, 20, [66]

  ἀνδράποδα, 17, 56, 60, 138

  ἀνδράποδα μισθοφοροῦντα, 39, 110

  ἀντίδοσις, 106

  ἀπαρχή, 77

  ἀπελεύθεροι, 97

  ἄποροι, 463

  ἀποφορά, 61, 64, 370

  ἀρετή, 86, 89, [91, 98]

  ἀστικός, 108

  αὐτουργία consistent with slaveowning, 13, 23, [40], 44, 50, 58-9,
        84, [88], 123, 136-7, 165, [225], 345, 439-40

  αὐτουργοὶ and αὐτουργία, 12, 13, [17], 23, 24, 35-6, [42], 49, 50,
        58, 60, 62, 67, 82, 94, 102-3, 107, 123, 128, 197, 277, 302,
        [371], 439 foll., [459]

  ἀφορμή, 302


  βάναυσοι, 73-4, 91, 98, 99, 101

  βάρβαροι, 31

  βασιλεύς, 400

  βασιλικοὶ γεωργοί, 204, [207], 347, [378]


  γαμόρος, 27, 32, [76]

  γαπόνος, 36, 37

  γεωργεῖν, 47, [88], 106

  γεωργοί, a special class, 29, 68, 74, 101, [204], [347, 378], 395, 401

  γεωργός, γεωργεῖν, etc., 33, 37, 39, 84, 90, 121, 445, 462

  γῆ κληρουχική, 210

  γῆ πεφυτευμένη, 104

  γράμματα, 400


  δασμολογεῖν, 83

  δεσπότης, 337, 341, 401

  δεσποτική, 97

  δημιοεργοί, 18, 75

  δημόσιοι, 68

  δμῶες, 17, 18, 20, 23

  δουλεία, 240

  [τὸ] δοῦλον, 34

  δοῦλος, 17, [79], 110


  ἔθνος, 122

  ἐνεργός, 225

  ἐπικαρπία, 225

  ἐπιμέλεια, 58

  ἐπιστάτης, 59, [172]

  ἐπίτροπος, 57, 59, 60, 461

  ἔργα, 16

  ἐργασία, 461-2

  ἐργάτης, 35, 107, 116, 121, 125, 128, 304, 461

  ἔργον, 19, 22-3

  ἔριθοι, 10, 23, 116

  ἔρις, 22

  ἐσχατιά, 106

  εὐπορία, 92, 102


  θῆτες, θητεύειν, 16, 18, 19, 20, 23, 25, 29, 35, 85, 98, 110, 144, 147

  θρέμματα, 122


  ἰδία, 211

  [τὸ] ἴσον, 66, [95]


  κατασκευή, 122, 240

  κατοικεῖν, 108

  κοινόν, 66

  κοινωνοί, 463


  μισθός, 16, 23, 34, 64, 75, 95, 110, [304]

  μισθωτοί, 46, 78, 85, [109], 110, 117, 125


  νόμος, 402


  ξύλα, 107


  οἰκέται, 30, 39, 64, 110, 341

  οἰκεύς, οἰκῆες, 17, 21, 30

  οἰκογενεῖς, 129

  οἰκοδεσπότης, 304

  οἰκονόμος, 461

  ὀπώρα, 108, 111

  ὄρη, 111

  ὅροι, 107


  παραμονά, 123

  πάροικοι, 347, 378

  πενέστης, 37, 116

  περίοικοι, 94

  πρόκλησις, 110


  σκαφεύς, 35, [116]

  στάσις, 66

  στρατιώτας, 116

  συνοικία, 108

  σώματα, 122, 396


  τεμένη, 111

  τεχνῖται, 68, 98

  τροφή, 75, 95, 304


  φελλεύς, 47, 83

  φιάλη, 237

  φύσις, 34-5


  χορηγία, 86, [93]

  χρηματιστική, 98

  χωρία, 463


B. LATIN

  _abigei_, 372

  _actor_, 258, 263, 299, 300, 319, 324, 367-8

  _adaeratio_, 396

  _addicere_, 424

  _adscribere_, _adscripticii_, 425

  _adsidui_, 10, 152, 253

  _advenae_, 425

  _aedificare_, 214

  _agellus_, 215-6, 219, 243, 318, 334, 425

  _aggeres publici_, 429

  _agrestes_, 199, 200, 230

  _agricola_, 227, 230, 284, 398, 445

  _agri fiscales_, 347

  _agri rudes_, 349

  _agri vectigales_, 376

  _alimenta_, 296 foll., 324

  _alligati_, [see _compediti_]

  _annonariae regiones_, 388

  _annona urbis_, 388, [402-3], 427

  _aquarii_, 294

  _arare_, _arator_, 195, 197-8, 214, 219, 227, 248, 308, 312

  _aridi fructus_, _partes aridae_, 350

  _artes_, 188, 193

  _artifex_, 245

  _asinarius_, 172, 227

  _atriensis_, 246, 250, 319

  _attributi_, 380

  _auctoritas principalis_, 376


  _bubulcus_, 172

  _burgus_, 429


  _calcarius_, 172

  _canon_, 350-1, [356], 428

  _capita_, 395, 421

  _capitatio_, 386, 395, 411, [421], 424, [431]

  _capitulum_, 410

  _capulator_, 172

  _casa_, 312

  _castella_, 413

  _censitores_, 421

  _civilis pars_, 418

  _classes, decuriae_, 261

  _colere_, 184, 230, 253, 267, 364

  _coloni Caesaris_, 208-9, [293?], 347, 355, 357, 377-8

  _coloni indigenae_, 252, [347], 396

  _colonia partiaria_, 211, 321, 332, 343, 347, [350], 356, [463]

  _colonia_, place to which _colonus_ belongs, 258

  _colonia_ [settlement], official sense, 133, [141], 152

  _colonus_ as serf-labourer, 383-4, 392, 394, 401, 416, 424-5, 429, 431

  _colonus_ as sub-tenant, 195, 209, 343-52, 355-6, 359, 376-7

  _colonus_ becoming bound to the soil, [161], 201, 210-2, 257, 274,
        333, 344-52, 356, 358-9, 383-4, 386-99, [404], 415-6, 450

  _colonus_, cultivator, 133, 167, 183, 195, 215, 230, [233], 249, 267,
        286, [293], [364], 445

  _colonus_, free but dependent, 161, 183, [195], 209, 254, [264],
        307-8, 312, 340, 358-9, 404

  _colonus imaginarius_, 367

  _colonus_ may sublet farm, 364

  _colonus_, mean economic and social position of, 195, 235-6, 243,
        246-7, 255, 307-8, 364

  _colonus_, member of a _colonia_, 293

  _colonus originalis_, 431

  _colonus_, tenant farmer [free in law and fact], 139, 157-8, 183-4,
        194-5, 202, [208], 210, 215-6, 221, 224, 233-5, 243, 246,
        252-5, [267], 286, [292], 295, 315, 325, 332, 362-3, 364,
        366-7, 371-3

  _colonus_, veteran allottee, 155-6, [215], 223, 249, [293?]

  _colonus_, yeoman farmer, 230

  _compediti alligati vincti_, 166, 172, [218], 220, 227, 248, [252],
        260-3, 300, 320, 334-5

  _compositio_, 431

  _conductor_, 264-5, 343, 345-51, 355-7, 359, 364, 366, 377, 405

  _conductum_, 247

  _conquisita_, 411

  _contubernalis_, _contubernium_, 258, 300

  _corpora_, 396

  _cultores_, free, 141, [198], 320

  _cura domini_, 252

  _curia_, _curiales_, 390, 392, 401-2, 425

  _cursus publicus_, [378], 391

  _custodes_, 171-2, 311, [321]


  _decem primi_, 421

  _decretae provinciae_, 408

  _decreta oppida_, 408

  _decuma_, δεκάτη, 195, 197, 204

  _dediticii_, 389, 424

  _dispensator_, 196

  _divisio_, ascertainment of shares, 350

  _domestici_ = _familia_, 185

  _domestici fidei_, 428

  _dominium_, 247, 376, 393

  _dominus_, 166, 171, 184, 215-6, 219, 229, 239, 247, 252, 260, 264,
        292, 311, 343, 350, 356, 363, 366, 368, 397, 416, 419, 430, 431

  _dotes_, 299


  _emphyteusis_, 350, 359, 376

  _emptor_, 171

  _epistates_, [59], 172

  _ergastulum_, 141, 145-6, 160, 185, 192, 233, 242, 260, 262-3, 285,
        334

  _exceptio iurisiurandi_, 364


  _faber_, 172, 184, 319

  _faber ferrarius_, 173

  _factores_, 171

  _familia_, 137, 155, 170-3, 188, 194, 245, 253, 258, 261, 334

  _famulus_, _famula_, 220-1, 227, 230-1, 249

  _fide dominica_, 299, 311

  _fideiussores_, 363

  _fiscalis raeda_, 422

  _fiscus_, 377-8

  _forma perpetua_, 347

  _fossor_, [see σκαφεύς], 186, 227, 248-9, 317

  _fructus_, 247, 321, 363, 366, 404

  _frui licere_, 363

  _frui possidere_, 351

  _frumentationes_, 326

  _fugitivi_, 191-2

  _fullones_, 184

  _fundi fiscales_, 377

  _fundus_, 343, [352], [356], 360, 366, 368, 412


  _genitale solum_, 393

  _gens_ as landholder, 134

  _gravia loca_, 180, 253


  _heredium_, 231

  _holitor_, 295

  _honores qui indicuntur_, 377

  _hortulanus_, 295, 332

  _hortus_, _horti_, 231, 249, 283, 295, 312


  _ianitor_, 311

  _immunitas_, 377

  _impatientia_, 419

  _imperium_, 148, 247

  _impotentia_, 295

  _incolae_, 360

  _indictiones_, 382-3, 393, 410-1

  _indigenae_, 425

  _indulgentiae_, 410

  _ingenuus_, 243, 287, 312, 317, 396

  _inquilini_, 339-40, 346, 360, [378], 395, 424, 430-2

  _inquilinus_ or _colonus_, 431-2

  _instruere_, _instrumentum_, 216, 243, 255, 297-9, 311, 320-1, 344-5,
        364-5, 367-8, 371

  _interdicta_, 189-91, 373

  _iugatio_, 395

  _iugerum_, 135, 139, 143, 167, 172, 184, 186, 230, 275, 281-2, 284,
        313

  _iuris alieni_, 386, [424], 425

  _ius commercii_, 389

  _iusta_, fair task, 259, 261


  _latifundia_, 143, 154, 160, 167-8, 185, 198, 201, 203, 205, [222],
        224, 236, 247, 249, 281, 283, 297, [314], 315, 354-5, 358, 369

  _latrones_, 372

  _legata_, 368

  _leguli_, 171

  _lex_ = charter, by-law, 343, 354

  _lex_ = contract, agreement, 233

  _lex Manciana_, 343, 352-3

  _liberalis_, 245, 331

  _locator_, 364

  _lustrum_, 321, 364, [376]


  _magister pecoris_, 172, 219, 228

  _magistri_, 228, 259, 260, 267

  _manceps_, 327, 376

  _mancipia_, 260, 262, 285, 320, 369

  _matrimonium_, 431

  _mediastinus_, 217, 261

  _medici_, 184, [228], [256]

  _mercator_, 215

  _mercennarius_, 125, 139-40, 159, 173, 176, 180, 182, 186, 188, 193,
        235, 247, 256, 371, [463]

  _merces_, 370-1

  _messores_, 188, 227, 417

  _militares viri_, 402

  _militaris impressio_, 405

  _militia_, 418

  _monitor_, 261

  _munera_, 377, 397


  _navicularii_, 391

  _nexus_, 263, 269

  _nudo consensu_, 364

  _nutrix_, [see τροφός], 431


  _obaerarii_ [_obaerati_], 180, 182, 216, 263, 269, 437

  _obnoxii_, 404

  _offensiones domesticae_, 181

  _opera_, _operae_, [170], 180, [186], 188, 193, 211, 229-30, 235,
        254, 256, 265, 267, 269, 282, 286, 327, 333, [340], 344-6,
        347-8, 351, 354, 370-1, [462]

  _operarius_, 125, 170, 172-3, 180, 185, 193, 197, 243, 261

  _opifex_, 144, 175, 193, 199, 245

  _opilio_, 172, 219, 262

  _opus_ [meaning of], 161, 252-4

  _opus exigere_, _facere_, _operis exactor_, etc., 258-9, 261, 265, 321

  _ordo [decurionum]_, 293, 376, 387

  _originarius_, _originalis_, 431

  _origo_, domicile, 211, 386, 396, 425, 430-1


  _paganus_, 313, 411, 423

  _palare_, verb, 282

  _palatium_, 347

  _partes agrariae_, 346, [350]

  _partes aridae_, 350

  _partiario_, _partiarius_, 166, 172, 343, 347

  _pastinatio_, 264, 284

  _pastores_, 162, 165-6, 171-2, 179, 183, 188, 191, 219, 227-8, [262]

  _pater_, _patres_, 215-7

  _patrocinia vicorum_, 400-1, 425

  _patronus_, 430-1

  _peculium_, 158, 167-8, 180-2, 219, 263, 299, 369

  _pensiones_, 161, 252

  _peregrini dediticii_, 389

  _persona plebeia )( colonaria_, 431

  _pervasio_, _pervasor_, 424

  _pignora_, 320

  _pistor_, 246

  _plebs_, _plebeius_, 341-2

  _politio_, _politores_, 172-3, 186

  _poma_, 350

  _possessio_, 189, 191, 194, 349-50, 372-3, 376, 405, 424

  _possessiones_, 143, [154], 165, 174-5, 247-8

  _possessores_, 233, 295, 350, 392-3, 397, 427

  _postliminium_, 332

  _potentes_, 392

  _praedia_, 289, 319, 320-1, 360

  _praedia Caesaris_, 207, [353-4], 377

  _praediola_, 194, 216

  _praefectus annonae_, 403, 427

  _prospectus urbi_, 402-3, 426

  _praetorium_, 366

  _precario_, 167

  _procurator_, 190, 194-5, 264, 319, 354-5, 368

  _procurators_, imperial, 341, 343, 345-52, 354-5, 377

  _proprius_, 425

  _provisa_, _provisiones_, 411

  _publica adflictio_, 424

  _publica_, _publicani_, 151-2, 179, 188, 192, 206, 318, 376

  _pulchritudo iungendi_, 251, [319]


  _quasi colonus_, 299, 311, 368-9, 450

  _quasi societatis iure_, 356, [363]

  _quinquennium_, see _lustrum_


  _ratio_ = imperial account, 346, 350

  _rationes_, 368, 404

  _reconductio_, 345, 364

  _reditus )( census_, 406

  _relationes_, 402-3

  _reliqua_, 298-9, 320-1, 343, 347, 365, 368, [404]

  _remissio_, 252, 320-1, 365

  _rustica mancipia_, 369, [435]

  _rusticatio_, 250

  _rusticus_, 230, 347


  _salictarius_, 172

  _saltuarii_, 250

  _salius_, 165, [179], 191, 214, 222, 235, 314, 343-52, [356], 360

  _scriptura_, 179, [192], [343]

  _secretum_, 408

  _sederi_, _sessor_, 418

  _sermo_, 349, 352

  _servitia_, slaves, 141, 239, 285, 287

  _servitium_, 229, 249, 262

  _servitutes_, 373-4

  _servus_, _serva_, 219, 221, 229, 247, 249, 252, 285, 334, [340],
        368, 371, 404

  _servus terrae_, 426

  _sollemnia )( incrementa_, 411

  _sordidus_, 245, 312, [397]

  _stipendiarii?_, 345

  _strictores_, 171

  _subsiciva_, 272

  _subulcus_, 172, 219

  _suburbicariae regiones_, 388, [403]

  _suffragium_, 428

  _sui_ (or _mei_) = slaves, 184, 321, 323

  _summa [consummatio]_ of labour, 172, [186], 267

  _superexactiones_, 397

  _superindictiones_, 382, 411

  _supprimere_, _suppressi_, 233, 243, 263


  _temo_, _temonaria functio_, etc., 396, 410, 414

  _territorium_, 428

  _Teutonicus vomer_, 416

  _tirocinia_, 413-4

  _topiarii_, 319

  _trans Tiberim_, 435

  _tributa_, 350-1, 378, 382, 410, [424]

  _tributarii_, 415, 431

  _tributarium iugum_, 427

  _trientabula_, 143, 152


  _usus_, 247, 363

  _usus fructus_, 370


  _vagus_, _vagi_, 229, 396

  _valetudinarium_, 161, 262

  _vectigal_, 376

  _veterani, milites_, 293

  _vicarii_, 324

  _vilica_, 170, 172, 251, 262, 306-8

  _vilicus_, 124, 140, 153, 158-60, 166, 170, 172, 185-6, 190, 194-6,
        215-7, [219], 224, [234], 242, 246, 251, 257-9, 262-4, 282,
        299, 306-8, 311, 316, 335, 343, 345, 355, 364, 367, 404, [419],
        461

  _villa_, 125, [136-8], 141, 165, 214, 216, 224, 231, 235, 246, 255,
        282, 298, 309, 311, 322, 343, 347, 366, 372, [412]

  _vincti_, [see _compediti_]

  _vinitor_, 219, 265

  _vir bonus_, umpire, 367

  _viritim_, _viritanus_, 133, 274

  _vis_ and _vis armata_, [189-91], 373

  _voluptaria praedia_, 366


III LIST OF PASSAGES CITED

  =Aelian=, _var hist_ V p 14, =282=

  =Aeschines=
    _Timarchus_ 13, =106=; 14, =109=; 4, =111=;
    _Embassy_ 59, =112=

  =Aeschylus=
    _Agam_ 733, =30=;
    _Eumen_ 186-90, =31=; 890-1, =32=;
    _Persae_ 186-7, 255, 337, 391, 423, 434, 475, 798, 844, =31=;
    _Prom_ 454-8, 708, =31=;
    _Suppl_ 612-4, =32=;
    _fragments_ =32=

  =Agrimensores= [_gromatici_, ed Lachmann], I 35, =205=, =358=; 53-4,
        =272=, =341=, =354=; 133, =272=; 203, =349=; 164, =354=

  =Ammianus=, XVI 5 §§ 14, 15, =410=; XVII 3, =411=; XVIII 1, =411=;
        XVIII 2 § 2, =412=; XIX 11 § 3, =391=; XIX 11 § 7, =396=,
        =413=; XX 4 § 1, =415=; XXVII 4 § 18, =405=; XXVIII 6 § 8,
        =413=; XXVIII 5 § 15, =415=; XXIX 6 § 6, =412=; XXIX 5 §§
        10-13, =412=; XXIX 5 § 25, =412=; XXX 5 § 6, =411=; XXX 10 § 4,
        =412=; XXX 2 § 10, =413=; XXXI 4 §§ 4, 5, =413=; XXXI 6 § 5,
        =414=; XXXI 10 § 17, =414=; XXXI 9 § 4, =415=

  =Andocides= (by pages)
    _de reditu_ 22, =81=;
    _de mysteriis_ 12, =82=;
    _de pace_ 25, 28, =84=

  =Antiphon=, fragm =82=

  =Appian=, _civ_, I 8 § 2, =131=; I 7 § 5, =144=, =248=; I 116 § 2,
        =162=; I 29 § 2, =275=

  =Apuleius=
    _apolog_ 24, =328=; 17, 23, =332=; 17, =333=; 23, =334=; 47, =334=;
        93, =334=; 87, =335=;
    _metam_ IV 9, =329=; IV 3, =332=; IV 30, =332=; V 17, =332=; VI 31,
        =329=; VII 4, 9, =329=; VII 15, =332=; VIII 22, =258=, =335=;
        VIII 24, =329=; VIII 17, =331=; VIII 17, 29, 31, =332=; VIII
        26, =332=; IX 12, =2=; IX 31-2, =295=, =332=; IX 39, 42, =330=;
        IX 35-8, =330=; IX 2, =331=; IX 39-42, =332=

  =Aristophanes=
    _Acharnenses_ 32-4, 180, 211, 557 foll, 626 foll, =42=; 248-50,
        259, 266, =44=; 1018-36, =47=;
    _Aves_ 1152, 1431-2, =46=; 712, =48=;
    _Ecclesiazusae_ 243, =40=; 197-8, 591-2, =41=, =46=; 651, =45=;
        605, =48=;
    _Equites_ 792-4, =40=; 316-7, =42=;
    _Lysistrata_ 1173-4, =43=; 1203-14, =45=;
    _Nubes_ 202-3, =41=; 43 foll, =42=, =45=; 138, =45=; 71-2, =47=;
    _Pax_ 632-6, =40=; 570, 1185-6, =42=; 190, 509-11, 551-70, 1127
        foll, 1318-24, =43=; 1140 foll, 1248-9, =45=; 552, 1318, =47=;
    _Plutus_ 510-626, =41=, =46=; 223-4, 903, =42=; 26-7, 253, 517-20,
        525-6, =45=;
    _Ranae_ 164-77, =46=;
    _Vespae_ 442-52, =45=; 712, 959, =46=, =111=;
      fragments =43=, =46=

  =Aristotle=
    Ἀθην πολ 16, 24, =11=, =25=, =86=, =89=; 11, 12, =25=, =89=; 4,
        =91=;
    _de mundo_ 6 §§ 4, 7, 13, =102=;
    _Economics_ I 5 § 1, 6 § 5, =87=, =97=; I 5 § 3, =95=, =304=; I 5 §
        5, =97=; I 6 § 9, =97=; I 5 § 6, =162=;
    _Ethics_ II 1 § 4, =93=; VIII 11 § 6, =99=; X 5 § 8, =95=; X 10 §
        13, =101=;
    _Politics_ [cited in old order of books], I 7 § 5, =87=; I 7, =97=;
        I 8 §§ 3 foll, =98=; I 9, =98=; I 10, 11, =98=; I 11 § 1, =98=;
        I 11 §§ 3-5, =99=; I 2 § 5, 5 §§ 8, 9, =99=; I 13 § 13, =99=;
        I 5, 6, =100=; I 11, =284=; I 2 § 5, =433=; II 6 § 13, =65=,
        =67=; II 7 § 1, =65=; II 7 § 6, =65=; II 12 § 10, =65=, =67=;
        II 7, 8, =65=, =67=; II 7 § 7, =67=, =91=; II 7 §§ 3-7, =67=;
        II 7 §§ 14, 15, =67=; II 8 §§ 2, 3, =67=; II 7 §§ 8, 9, =68=;
        II 6 § 15, =91=; II 7 § 12, =91=; II 6 § 17, =95=; II 9 §§
        21-2, =95=; II 9 § 34, =95=; II 3 § 4, =97=, =124=; II 5 §§ 4,
        8, =97=; II 5 § 28, =99=; II 5 § 19, =101=; II 10 § 16, =101=;
        II 6 § 6, =102=; III 13 § 2, =66=; III 15 § 13, =89=; III 5
        § 2, =97=; III 5 §§ 4-6, =98=; IV 4 §§ 15, 18, =89=; IV 6 §
        2, =89=; IV 15 § 6, =92=; IV 8 § 5, 9 § 4, =94=; IV 9 §§ 7-9,
        =95=; V 6 §§ 12, 13, =95=; VI 4 §§ 8-10, =88=; VI 4 §§ 1, 2,
        13, 14, =89=, =90=; VI 4 § 11, =90=; VI 5 §§ 8-10, =92=; VI 8
        § 3, =99=; VI 2 § 3, 4 § 20, =101=; VII 6 §§ 7, 8, =54=, =90=,
        =100=; VII 4 § 6, =86=, =96=; VII 8 §§ 7-9, =86=, =102=; VII 9,
        =89=; VII 16 §§ 12, 13, =90=, =93=; VII 8, 9, 10, =94=; VII 9
        § 5, =95=; VII 14, 15, =95=; VII 2 §§ 3-7, =97=; VII 10 § 14,
        =97=; VII 6 §§ 1-5, =99=; VII 15 §§ 1-6, =100=; VII 12 §§ 3-6,
        =101=; VII 10 § 13, =162=; VIII 4, =95=, =100=, =101=; VIII 6
        §§ 3-8, =98=; VIII 3 § 7, =100=;
    _Rhetoric_ I 13 § 2, =35=; I 9 § 27, =99=; I 12 § 25, =102=; II 4 §
        9, =102=; III 8 § 1, =97=

  =Arrian=, _Indica_ 10 §§ 8, 9, =123=, =210=

  =Athenaeus=, 149 _d_, =50=; 263, 267 _e_-270 _a_, =62=; 272 _a_, 264
        _c_, =123=; 276 _b_, =245=; 264 _d_, =442=

  =Attic Comedy=, 61-5, =121=

  =Augustin=, _de civitate Dei_ X 1, =393=


  =Caesar=
    _bell Afr_ 32, 35, 56, =275=; 9, 40, 65, =412=;
    _bell civ_ I 34, 56, =14=, =183=, =254=;
    _bell Gall_ IV 1, VI 22, =291=

  =Calpurnius=, IV 118, =249=; IV 25-6, =265=

  =Cato=
    _de agri cultura_ 5 § 4, =140=, =173=; 2 § 7, =158=, =167=; 5 § 2,
        =159=; 3 § 1, =166=; 4, =166=, =170=;
    _praef_ =166=, =167=; 16, 136-7, 146, =166=; 147, =166=; 56-7,
        =166=, =172=, =186=; 10 § 1, 11 § 1, =167=, =172=; 1 § 4,
        =167=; 1 § 3, =170=; 2 § 1, =170=; 5, 83, 143, =170=; 13 § 1,
        =171=; 64 § 1, =171=; 66, =171=; 144-5, =171=; 146, =171=; 149
        § 2, =171=; 150, =172=; 66-7, =172=; 16, 38, =172=; 5 § 6,
        =172=; 14, =172=; 7 § 2, 21 § 5, =173=; 2 §§ 2, 4, =173=; 136,
        =173=;
    _Remains_ (ed Jordan) p 77, =164=; 43, =165=, =169=

  =Catullus=, XXIII 1, =221=

  =Cicero=
    _ad Atticum_ XIII 9 § 2, =194=, =216=;
    _ad familiares_ XIII 7, 11, =207=; XVI 16 § 1, =197=;
    _Brutus_ § 257, =188=; § 85, =192=; § 297, =193=;
    _Catil_ II § 18, =14=, =155=, =289=; II § 20, =155=;
    _Cato maior_ § 56, =135=, =137=;
    _de finibus_ V § 52, =188=;
    _de imperio Pompei_ § 16, =188=;
    _de lege agraria_ II § 78, =155=; II § 80-3, =198=; II §§ 84, 88-9,
        =198=; II § 82, =199=; II § 50, =207=;
    _de legibus_ III § 30, =201=;
    _de officiis_ I § 150, =188=, =230=; I § 151, =193=; I § 41, =193=,
        =230=; II § 89, =154=, =165=; III § 112, =145=;
    _de oratore_ I §§ 83, 263, =188=, =193=; I § 249, =194=, =264=; II
        § 40, =188=, =193=; II § 287, =195=; III § 46, =188=, =193=,
        =227=;
    _de republica_ III § 16, =157=; V § 5, =186=, =195=;
    _in toga candida_, fr 11, =191=; II;
    _in Verrem_ I § 147, =193=; II § 27, =191=; III § 119, =158=,
        =196=; III § 66, =191=; III §§ 53-5 and _passim_, =195=; III §
        27, =197=; III § 55, =224=; III § 190, =391=; IV § 112, =191=;
        IV § 77, =193=; V § 45, =142=; V _passim_, =191=;
    _paradoxa_ VI § 46, =190=;
    _Philippics_ VIII § 32, =196=;
    _pro Caecina_ §§ 10-19, =190=; § 1, =191=; §§ 58, 63, =193=, =194=;
        §§ 17, 57, 94, =194=; § 94, =224=;
    _pro Cluentio_ § 161, =191=; § 163, =193=; §§ 175, 182, =195=,
        =224=;
    _pro Fonteio_ §§ 11-13, =274=;
    _pro Murena_ § 62, =187=;
    _pro Plancio_, § 62, =196=;
    _pro Rabirio_ (_perd_) §§ 10-17, =196=;
    _pro Roscio comoedo_ §§ 32, 49, 54, =189=;
    _pro Sex Roscio_ §§ 39-51, =146-7=, =193=; § 120, =197=;
    _pro Sulla_ §§ 56-9, =290=;
    _pro Tullio_ §§ 7-12, 21, =189=; §§ 14-22, =190=; § 17, =190=,
        =194=, =264=; § 8, =191=;
    _pro Vareno_ fr 5, =191=;
    _Tusculan disputations_ I § 34, =188=; III § 77, =188=; V § 104,
        =188=; V § 34, =193=

  =Claudian=, =415-7=

  =Codex Justinianus=, IV 65 § 6, =364=; IV 61 § 5, =397=; IX 38,
        =375=; X 32 § 42, =402=; XI 48 § 13, =340=, =424=, =431=; XI 59
        § 1, =387=; XI 48 §§ 2, 4, =393=; XI 48 § 7, =394=; XI 50 §§
        1, 2, =394=; XI 55 § 2, =397=; XI 48 § 1, =398=; XI 54, =400=,
        =425=; XI 64 § 2, 48 § 16, =425=; XII 33 § 6, =396=

  =Codex Theodosianus=, II 4 §§ 5, 6, =424=; III 1 § 2, =425=; IV 13
        §§ 2, 3, =395=, =397=; V 17, 18 [= 9, 10 Gothofr], =340=; V
        11 §§ 8, 12, 14 § 30, =349=, =357=; V 14 § 34, =351=; V 17
        [9] §§ 1, 2, =386=, =393=, =425=; V 17 § 2, =402=; V 18 [10],
        =424=, =425=, =431=; VI 26 § 14, =396=; VII 13 §§ 7, 8, 12,
        =395=, =396=; VII 13 § 7, =396=; VII 18 § 10, =396=; VII 13 §
        3, =418=; VII 1 § 12, =423=; VII 20 § 7, =423=; VII 22, 1 §
        8, =423=; VIII 5, =391=, =423=; VIII 2 § 3, =396=; IX 32 § 1,
        =375=; IX 30 § 3, =418=; X 3 § 4, =351=; X 3, =400=; X 10 § 25,
        =416=; XI 1 § 28, =293=; XI 1 § 4, =351=, =404=; XI 2 §§ 1-5,
        =388=; XI 1 § 14, =390=, =393=; XI 28, =390=, =410=; XI 1 §§
        11, 21, 22, =391=; XI 16 §§ 3, 4, =391=, =398=; XI 16, =393=;
        XI 1 § 12, =394=; XI 3 § 2, =394=; XI 7-10, 16 § 10, =395=; XI
        11, =395=, =397=; XI 8, =397=; XI 16 §§ 14, 15, 18, =396=, =414=;
        XI 16 § 10, 17 §§ 2-4, =397=; XI 24, =400=, =425=; XI 24 § 2,
        =402=; XI 16 § 15, =410=; XI 1 § 36, =411=; XI 6, =411=; XI 1
        § 26, 3 §§ 1-5, =425=; XI 3 § 3, =425=; XI 1 § 26, =426=; XII
        1 § 45, =293=; XII 19, =340=; XII 1 § 128, =402=; XII 1 § 169,
        =411=; XIII 5, =391=; XIII 10 § 1, =391=; XIII 10 § 3, =393=;
        XIV 4 § 4, =391=; XIV 18, =392=; XIV 24, =408=; XVI 5 § 48,
        =392=; XVI 5 § 54, =405=

  =Columella=, I 4 § 2, =139=; I _praef_ §§ 3, 12, 13, 20, =160=; I 3
        § 12, =161=, =233=; I 7, =161=, =224=, =233=, =252=, =355=; I
        9 § 4, =172=, =186=, =300=; I 3 §§ 6, 7, =248=; I _praef_ §§
        12, 13-15, =251=, =256=; I 1 § 20, =251=; I 3 §§ 6, 7, 8-13,
        =251=; I 5 § 5, =253=; I 4 §§ 4, 5, =258=; I 8, =258=; I 8 §§
        1-3, =258=; I 8 §§ 3, 4, =258=; I 8 § 5, =258=; I 8 § 6, =258=;
        I 8 § 8, =258=; I 8 § 9, =258=; I 8 § 10, =259=; I 8 § 11,
        =259=; I 8 § 12, =259=; I 8 § 13, =259=; I 8 §§ 13-4, =259=; I
        8 § 15, =260=; I 8 § 16, =260=; I 8 §§ 17-8, =260=; I 8 § 19,
        =260=; I 9 §§ 1-6, =261=; I 9 §§ 7, 8, =261=; I 4 § 7, =262=;
        I 6 § 3, =262=; I 3 § 12, =263=; I 6 § 19, =263=; I 8 § 5, 7 §
        7, =263=; I 6 § 7, =264=; I 6 § 23, =264=; I _praef_ §§ 1, 2,
        =265=; I 3 § 9, =265=; I _praef_ § 12, =267=; I _praef_ § 17,
        =267=; I 2 § 3, =267=; I 3 §§ 3, 4, =267=; I 4 § 4, =267=; I 5
        §§ 6, 7, =267=; I 6 §§ 9-17, =267=; I 6 §§ 7, 8, =355=; II 2
        § 12, =256=; II 1, =265=; II 9 §§ 14, 16, =266=; II 6 § 2, 9
        § 13, =267=; II 13 § 7, =267=; II 20 § 6, =267=; II 21 § 10,
        =267=; III 3 § 11, =205=, =358=; III 21 § 10, =256=, =265=; III
        13 §§ 12, 13, =264=; III 3 § 4, =265=; III 3 § 8, =265=; IV 6 §
        3, =256=; IV 3 § 1, =262=; IV 3 § 6, =265=; VI _praef_ §§ 3-5,
        =154=, =165=, =266=; VI _praef_ §§ 1, 2, =184=; VI _praef_ §
        7, =229=; VI 2 § 15, 3 § 3, =261=; VI _praef_ § 4, =263=; VIII
        11 § 2, 12, 15 § 7, =262=; VIII 2 § 7, =263=; VIII 10 §§ 3,
        4, =266=; XI 1 § 18, =161=, =262=; XI 1, =258=; XI 1 §§ 3, 4,
        7, =258=; XI 1 §§ 9-13, =258=; XI 1 §§ 13, 19, =258=; XI 1 §§
        20-1, =258=; XI 1 § 21, =258=; XI 1 §§ 22-3, =258=; XI 1 § 23,
        =258=; XI 1 §§ 4 foll, =259=, =260=; XI 1 § 23, =259=; XI 1 §
        24, =259=; XI 1 §§ 25-6, =259=; XI 1 §§ 27-30, =259=; XI 1 §
        22, =260=; XI 1 §§ 8, 9, =261=; XI 1 § 22, =262=; XI 1 § 12,
        =267=; XII _praef_ §§ 8-10, =160=, =251=; XII 1 § 6, 3 §§ 7, 8,
        =161=; XII 1 §§ 1, 2, =258=; XII 1 § 6, 3 §§ 7, 8, =262=; XII
        3, _praef_ § 9, =262=; XII 3 § 6, =263=


  =Deinarchus=, p 99, =96=

  =Demosthenes= (cited by marginal pages)
    _Androtion_ 613, =107=;
    _Aphobus_ 816, =106=;
    _Aristocrates_ 668, =108=;
    _Callicles_ 1274 etc, =108=;
    _Crown_ 239, =106=; 242, =109=; 314, =111=;
    _Embassy_ 376, 386, 426, 442, =106=; 376, =107=; 401-2, =112=;
    _Eubulides_ 1319, =109=; 1318, =111=; 1313, =111=;
    _Euergus and Mnesibulus_ 1155 etc, =109=;
    _For Phormio_ 945, =106=;
    _Lacritus_ 933, =107=;
    _Leptines_ 466-7, =104=;
    _Midias_ 568, =107=; 530 etc, =112=;
    _Nausimachus_ 986, =106=;
    _Nicostratus_ 1253 etc, =108=;
    _Olynthiacs_ 17, =104=, =111=;
    _Pantaenetus_ 979, =108=;
    _Phaenippus_ 1040-1, =106=, =111=; 1044-5, =111=;
    _Polycles_ 1207-8, =105=;
    _Timotheus_ 1187, =109=; 1199 etc, =110=

  =Digest=, I 19 § 3¹, =347=, =357=; I 5 § 17, =389=; II 14 § 42,
        =350=, =378=; VI 3 §§ 1, 2, 3, =376=; VII 8 §§ 10⁴, 11, =363=;
        VII 1 § 41, =365=; VII 1 § 13, =366=; VII 1 § 13⁴, =366=; VII
        4 §§ 8, 10, =366=; VII 1 §§ 25, 26, =370=; VII 7 § 3, =370=;
        VII 1 § 27³, =374=; VIII 6 § 7, =293=; VIII 6 § 20, =371=; VIII
        3, =373=; IX 2 § 27¹⁴, =363=; IX 2 § 27⁹,¹¹, =368=; XI 4 § 1¹,
        =375=; XII 1 § 4¹, =321=; XII 2 § 28⁶, =364=, =366=; XII 6 §
        55, =370=; XIII 7 § 25, =365=; XIII 4 § 3, =375=; XV 3 § 16,
        =368=, =450=; XVII 2 § 46, =363=; XVIII 1 § 35⁸, =372=; XIX 2
        § 24³, =252=; XIX 2 §§ 24, 25³, =254=; XIX 2 § 24, =321=; XIX
        2 § 3, =344=; XIX 2 § 19², =344=, =364=, =365=; XIX 2 §§ 15³,
        24², 25², 51ᵖʳ, 54¹, =351=, =363=; XIX 2 §§ 15⁴, 25⁶, =356=;
        XIX 2 §§ 15¹,²,⁸, 25⁶, =363=; XIX 2 § 54ᵖʳ, =363=; XIX 2 §§
        9²,³, 23, 51ᵖʳ, =363=; XIX 2 § 52, =363=; XIX 2 §§ 15⁸, 24⁴,
        25¹, =363=; XIX 2 § 15²,⁵, =363=; XIX 2 § 25⁶, =363=; XIX 2 §
        60⁵, =363=; XIX 2 § 24¹, =364=; XIX 2 § 54¹, =364=; XIX 2 §§
        13¹¹, 14, =364=; XIX 2 §§ 3, 54², =364=; XIX 2 § 25³, =364=;
        XIX 2 §§ 19³, 25⁶, =365=; XIX 2 § 15, =365=; XIX 2 § 2ᵖʳ,
        =365=; XIX 2 §§ 25⁵, 29, =366=; XIX 2 §§ 55¹, 61ᵖʳ, =366=; XIX
        1 § 49, =367=; XIX 2 § 30⁴, =368=; XIX 2 § 60⁷, =370=; XIX 2 §
        25⁴, =372=; XIX 2 §§ 9³, 15, =374=; XIX 2 § 15², =374=; XIX 1
        § 13⁶, 2 § 53, =376=; XIX 2 § 49, =377=; XIX 1 § 13⁶, =382=;
        XIX 2 §§ 13⁷, 15², =405=; XX 2 §§ 4, 7, =320=; XX 1 § 21ᵖʳ,
        =363=; XX 6 § 14, =363=; XX 1 § 32, =367=; XXI 1 § 32, =368=;
        XXVII 9 § 13ᵖʳ, =365=; XXVIII 5 § 35³, =368=; XXX § 112ᵖʳ,
        =360=; XXX § 39¹⁰, =377=; XXXI § 86¹, =256=, =365=; XXXII 1
        § 99, =307=, =369=, =435=; XXXII § 91¹, =344=, =366=; XXXII
        §§ 91¹, 93², 101¹, =364=; XXXII § 41⁵, =367=; XXXII §§ 60³,
        68³, =368=; XXXII §§ 41⁵, 91ᵖʳ,¹, =368=; XXXII §§ 91ᵖʳ, 97,
        =368=; XXXII § 97, =369=; XXXIII 7 § 12⁴, =250=; XXXIII 7 §
        25¹, =254=, =369=; XXXIII 7 § 19, =255=; XXXIII 7 §§ 18⁴, 20¹,
        =257=, =365=, =367=, =371=; XXXIII 7 § 8ᵖʳ, =261=; XXXIII 7 §§
        12³, 20¹,³, =299=, =369=; XXXIII 7 § 12⁷,³³, =300=; XXXIII 7 §
        20⁴, =300=; XXXIII 7 § 12¹²,¹³, =307=, =369=; XXXIII 7 § 15²,
        =311=; XXXIII 7, =344=; XXXIII 4 § 1¹⁵, =363=; XXXIII 7 §§ 4,
        15², 18⁴, 20¹, =364=; XXXIII 7 § 24, =365=; XXXIII 7 § 12³, 8 §
        23³, =368=, =450=; XXXIII 7 §§ 12³⁸, 20³,⁴, 22¹, =368=; XXXIII
        7 § 20, =368=; XXXIII 8 §§ 6ᵖʳ, 8ᵖʳ, =369=; XXXIII 2 § 28,
        =382=; XXXIII 7 § 25¹, =435=; XXXIV 3 §§ 16, 18, =364=; XXXIV
        4 § 31ᵖʳ, =367=; XXXIV 1 § 18³, 3 § 12, =368=; XXXIX 4 § 12²,
        =160=; XXXIX 6 § 3, =330=; XXXIX 3 §§ 4²,³, 5, =366=; XXXIX 4 §
        11¹,⁵, =376=;
  XL 7 § 40⁵, =299=, =364=; XL 7 § 40⁶, =367=; XL 7 § 40ᵖʳ,⁴,⁵,
        =368=; XL 7 § 14ᵖʳ, =371=; XLI 3 § 33¹, =350=, =373=; XLI 2
        § 30⁶, =364=; XLI 1 § 44, =372=; XLI 2 §§ 3⁸,¹², 25¹, =373=;
        XLI 1 § 7¹⁻⁶, =374=; XLIII 24 § 15¹, =264=; XLIII 20 §§ 2, 5,
        =293=; XLIII 20 § 1³⁹⁻⁴³, =294=; XLIII 32, 33, =363=; XLIII 16
        § 20, =364=; XLIII 24 § 13⁶, =366=; XLIII 16 § 1²⁰, 24 § 3ᵖʳ,
        =371=; XLIII 24 § 5¹¹, =371=; XLIII 16, =373=; XLIII 9 § 1,
        =376=; XLIII 8 § 2⁴, =377=; XLIV 7 § 34², =363=; XLV 1 § 89,
        =363=; XLV 3 § 18³, =371=; XLVII 12, =312=; XLVII 2 §§ 52⁸,
        62⁸, 83¹, 10 § 5⁴, =363=; XLVII 2 § 68⁵, =363=; XLVII 2 § 26¹,
        =365=, =367=; XLVII 2 §§ 26¹, 62³, 7 § 9, =366=; XLVII 14,
        =372=; XLVII 21 § 2, =372=; XLVII 9 §§ 3³, 16, =375=; XLVII 11
        §§ 9, 10, =375=; XLVIII 19 § 16⁷, =372=; XLVIII 22 § 1, =378=;
        XLIX 14 § 47¹, =347=, =377=; XLIX 14 § 50, =350=, =363=; XLIX
        16 § 5², =372=; XLIX 14 § 3⁶, =376=; XLIX 14, =378=; XLIX 14 §
        3¹⁰, =378=; XLIX 14 §§ 47, 50, =378=; L 6 § 6¹¹, =347=, =377=;
        L 15 § 4⁸, =360=; L 16 § 198, =366=; L 11 § 2, =375=; L 8 § 2¹,
        =376=; L 16 § 219, =376=; L 1 § 38¹, =377=; L 4 § 4, =377=,
        =451=; L 5 §§ 10, 11, =378=; L 5 § 1², =392=; L 15 §§ 3, 4,
        =420=; L 1 § 38⁶, 2 § 1, 4 § 14⁶, =451=

  =Diodorus=, I 28, 73-4, =29=; II 39, =123=; II 40-1, =210=; V 38 § 1,
        =2=; XVIII 18, =120=; XVIII 70 § 1, =129=; XX 84, 100, =122=;
        XXXIV 2 § 26, =162=; XXXIV 2 § 48, =198=; XXXVI =162=; XXXVI 5
        § 6, =198=

  =Dion Cassius=, Fragm 40 § 27, =139=; XLIII 4 § 2, =275=; XLVIII 6 §
        3, =240=; LII 27-8, =225=; LXXVI 10, =342=; LXXVII 9 § 5, =389=

  =Dion Chrysostom=, _orat_ VII =300-3=; X =302=; XIV =302=; XV 15,
        =302=

  =Dionysius=, _Rom Ant_ I 36-7, =232=; II 28, cf 8, 9, =210=; III 31,
        =144=; IV 9, 13, =144=; VI 3, =136=; VI 79, =144=; X 8, 17,
        =135=; XVII [XVIII] 4, =147=; XIX 15, =138=


  =Euripides=
    _Alcestis_ 2, 6, =35=;
    _Cyclops_ 76 foll, 23-4, =35=;
    _Electra_ 37-8, 375-6, =33=; 35-9, 73-4, 75-6, 78-81, 203-4, 252,
        =35=; 360, 394, =36=;
    _Heraclidae_ 639, 788-9, 890, =37=;
    _Herc Fur_ 1341-6, =35=;
    _Orestes_ 918-20, =36=, =102=;
    _Phoenissae_ 405, =33=;
    _Rhesus_ 74-5, 176, =37=;
    _Suppl_ 870, =30=; 420-2, =36=; fragments =33=, =34=, =36=, =37=


  =Festus=, p 306 (Lindsay), =137=

  =Florus=, II 7 § 3, =207=

  =Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum=, (_FHG_), =121=

  =Frontinus=, _de aquis passim_, =294-6=

  =Fronto= (Naber), p 29, =284=; 169, =323=; 144, =327=; 35, =330=


  =Gellius=, II 18, =327=; III 3, =327=; V 3, =327=; XV 4, =327=; XX 1
        § 47, =435=


  =Herodian=, II 4 § 6, =337=; VII 4 §§ 3-6, =341=

  =Herodotus=, II 141, 164-7, 168, =28=, =29=, =210=; IV 72, =30=; IV
        137, =30=; VI 137, =30=; VII 102, =29=; VIII 26, 105-6, =28=,
        =29=; VIII 68, =28=; VIII 51, =29=; VIII 137, =29=; VIII 142,
        =30=; VIII 4, 41, 44, 106, =30=; IX 11, 53, 55, =28=

  =Hesiod=, _Works_, =22-4=

  =Hipponax=, =25=

  =Historia Augusta=
    _Alexander_ 55 §§ 2, 3, =338=;
    _Antoninus Pius_ 12 § 3, =378=;
    _Aurelian_ 48 § 2, =337=; 39 § 7, =338=;
    _Claudius_ (_Gothicus_) 9 §§ 4, 5, =337=;
    _Commodus_ 17 §§ 7, 8, =347=;
    _Gallienus_ 9 § 5, =338=;
    _Hadrian_ 18, =160=, =233=; 7 § 5, =378=; 22 § 6, =418=;
    _M Aurelius_ 11 § 7, =273=; 21 §§ 6, 7, =324=;
    _Maximin_ 13 § 4, 14 § 1, =341=;
    _Probus_ 16 § 6, =337=; 18 §§ 1, 2, =338=;
    _Severus_ 14 § 2, =378=

  =Homeric Poems=
    _Iliad_ =16-17=;
    _Odyssey_ =17-22=

  =Horace=
    _Epistles_ I 12, =207=; I 14, =215=; I 7, =234=; I 15, 45-6, =235=;
        I 14, 39, =236=; I 16, 69-72, =236=; I 1, 21, =254=; I 18, 36,
        =295=; II 1, 139-40, =213=; II 2, 177-8, =214=; II 2, 184-6,
        =236=;
    _Epodes_ II 3, =214=; II 39 foll, =214=; II =230=; IV =201=, =236=;
        IV 13, =214=;
    _Odes_ I 12, =213=; I 1, =214=; I 35, =214=; I 1, =215=; II 15,
        =200=, =213=; II 15, 18, =213=; II 3, =214=; II 14, =214=; II
        16, =214=; III 6, =200=, =213=; III 1, 4, 5, 16, =214=; III 16,
        =214=; III 2, =215=; III 4, 37-8, =215=, =236=; III 18, =227=;
        IV 5, 15, =200=, =232=;
    _Satires_ I 5 77 foll, =214=; I 3, 99 foll, =236=; I 1, 28, 32,
        =237=; II 6, 6-15, =213=; II 7, 23, =213=; II 2, 115, =214=,
        =235=; II 6, 55-6, =215=, =236=; II 2, =234=; II 6, =235=; II
        7, 118, =235=

  =Hybrias=, =25=

  =Hyperides=, fragm =109=, =111=


  =Inscriptions=
    CIL I 1034, 1076, 1386, =137=; I 551, =191=; VIII 15454, =275=;
        VIII 18587, =293=; VIII 14428, =348=; VIII 8425, 8426, 8702,
        8777, =357=;
    Bruns _fontes_ =143=, =175=;
    Collitz =126=;
    Dessau 7822-3, =137=; 1334, =275=; 6790, =275=;
    Dittenberger =126=, =343=, =374=;
    General reference =312=;
    Girard, _Textes_ ed 4, =272=, =343=, =389=;
    Mommsen =374=;
      _monumentum Ancyranum_ =177=, =237=;
    Wilmanns =191=, =296=, =408=;
    Wordsworth, _specimens_ =143=, =175=, =191=

  =Isaeus= (cited by speeches and sections), V § 39, =85=; VI §§ 19-22,
        =82=; VI § 33, =84=; VIII § 42, p 73, =47=, =83=; VIII § 35,
        =82=; XI §§ 41-4, =82=; fragment =84=

  =Isocrates= (cited by marginal pages in Baiter and Sauppe)
    _Archidamus_ _passim_ =84=;
    _Areopagiticus_ 150, =82=; 148, =83=; 150-1, 156, =83=;
    _Busiris_ 224-5, =29=, =72=;
    _de bigis_ 349, =81=;
    _de pace_ 173, 185, =70=; 170, =71=; 178-80, =72=; 183, =82=; 164,
        =83=; 177, =83=, =84=;
    _Helen_ 218, =72=;
    _Panathenaicus_ 271, =75=; 270, =82=; 235, 241, =83=;
    _Panegyricus_, 46, =81=; 47-8, =83=; 67-8, =83=; 50, =113=;
    _Philippus_ 91-2, =82=;
    _Plataicus_ 306, =85=;
    _Trapeziticus_ 370, =81=

  =Itineraries=, =293=


  =Julian=, _orat_ VII =419=

  =Jurists= (_separately cited_)
    Gaius I 42-7, =333=; II 7, 21, =293=, =351=; III 145, =255=, =376=;
        III 142, =365=;
    Paulus _sent_ I 6 _a_ § 5, =375=; III 6 §§ 38, 40, =300=; V 3 § 4,
        =375=;
    Fragmentum Vaticanum § 13, =367=

  =Juvenal=, I 107-8, =59=, =315=; I 75, =366=; II 73-4, =313=; III 58
        foll, =271=; III 223-9, =313=, =316=; IV 25-6, =307=; VI 1-18,
        =313=; VI 287-95, =313=; VI 149-52, =315=; VII 188-9, =314=;
        VII 148-9, =328=; VIII 245 foll, =313=; IX 55, =249=; IX 54-5,
        =314=; IX 59-62, =314=, =315=; X 268-70, =167=; X 356-66,
        =314=, =316=; X 225-6, =315=; X 19-22, =323=; XI 70-1, =309=;
        XI 86-9, =313=; XI 77-131, =313=; XI 151 foll, =315=; XI 77-81,
        =317=; XIV 267-302, =309=; XIV 161-71, =312=; XIV 70-2, =313=;
        XIV 159-63, =313=; XIV 179-81, =313=; XIV 86-95, 140 foll,
        274-5, =315=; XIV 140-55, =315=; XIV 24, =334=; XV 147-58,
        =313=; XVI 32-4, =313=; XVI 36-9, =315=


  =Lactantius=, _de mort persecutorum_ 23 § 5, =389=; 7 § 3, =393=;
        22-3, =420=

  =Libanius=, XXIV 16, =395=; XLVII _passim_ =400-2=; L 36, =400=

  =Livy=, II 23 etc, =133=; II 22 §§ 5-7, =137=; III 13 §§ 8-10, =135=;
        III 26, =135=; III 27 § 1, =135=; VI 12 § 5, =147=, =156=; VI
        12, =239=; VII 4, 5, =145=; VII 25 § 8, =147=, =156=; VII 25,
        =239=; VIII 20 § 4, =144=; IX 44, =147=; X 4 § 9, =28=; X 36 §
        17, =136=; X 26 § 15, 32 § 1, 37, 46 § 16, =147=; XI _epit_,
        =148=; XVIII _epit_, =139=; XXI 63 §§ 3, 4, =142=; XXII 57
        § 11, =142=; XXIII 32 § 15, =141=; XXIII 49 §§ 1-4, =142=;
        XXIV 18 § 11, =142=; XXV 1 § 4, =141=; XXV 1 § 4, 3 § 8-4 §
        11, =142=; XXVI 35 § 5, =141=; XXVI 36, =142=; XXVIII 11 § 9,
        =141=; XXIX 16 §§ 1-3, =143=; XXXI 13, =143=; XXXIII 42 § 3,
        =143=; XXXIII 36 § 1, =162=; XXXIV 51 §§ 4-6, =127=; XXXIV 50,
        =129=; XXXIX 29 §§ 8, 9, 41 § 6, =162=; XLV 18 § 3, =207=

  =Lucan=, I 158-82, =248=; II 95, =334=; VI 152, =249=; VII 402,
        =227=; VII 387-439, =248=

  =Lucian=, _Timon_ 7, 8, =64=

  =Lucretius=, III 1053-75, =201=

  =Lycurgus=, p 151, =104=

  =Lysias=, Or XXII =81=; p 92, =82=; pp 108-9, =82=, =84=


  =Macrobius=, (_sat_) I 11 § 22, =240=

  =Martial=, I 55, =306=, =312=; I 85, =312=; I 101, =318=; II 11,
        =307=; III 47, =306=, =309=; III 58, =309=; III 46, =317=; IV
        66, =307=; V 4, =232=; V 35, =309=; VI 73, =308=; VI 29, =318=;
        VII 31, =306=, =307=, =309=; VII 80, =310=; VII 36, =312=; VIII
        61, =306=; IX 18, 97, =306=; IX 2, =308=; IX 35, =309=; IX 92,
        =317=; X 48, =306=, =312=; X 87, =307=; X 92, =308=; X 14,
        =309=; X 30, =311=; X 61, =312=; X 85, =312=; X 92, =312=; X
        47, =317=; XI 70, =158=, =167=; XI 34, =312=; XI 48, =312=; XII
        72, =306=; XII 59, =307=; XII 57, =308=; XIV 49, =317=

  =Menander=, =63-4=, =124=

  =Musonius= (_in Stobaeus_), =277=


  =New Testament Writers=
    Matt 21 §§ 28-30, =303=; 21 §§ 33-41, =303=; 20 §§ 1-16, =304=; 6 §
        12, =305=; 25 §§ 14-30, =305=;
    Mar 12 §§ 1-9, =303=;
    Luk 20 §§ 9-16, =303=; 12 §§ 16-9, =304=; 12 §§ 42-8, =304=; 16 §§
        1-12, =304=; 7 § 41, 16 § 5, =305=; 19 §§ 12-26, =305=;
    Acts 1 § 18, 4 §§ 34-7, =305=;
    Rom 4 § 4, =304=; I Cor 9 §§ 7-10, =303=; 4 § 2, =304=;
    Ephes 6 §§ 5 foll, =323=;
    Coloss 3 §§ 22 foll, =323=; I Tim 5 § 18, =303=; II Tim 2 § 6,
        =303=; I Pet 2 §§ 18 foll, =323=;
    James 5 § 4, =304=

  =Nonius=, p 66
    Müller, =173=


  The ‘=Old Oligarch=’, 1 §§ 3, 5, 10, 11, 12, =38=; 1 §§ 17, 19,
        =39=; 2 § 14, =39=

  =Ovid=
    _fasti_ I 207, III 779-82, IV 693-4, =218=;
    _metam_ I 135-6, =218=


  =Palladius=, I 8, 11, 24, 33, =366=; VII 2, =398=

  =Panegyrici Latini=, V 18, =338=; VIII 11, =390=

  =Pausanias=, VIII 24 § 13, X 24 § 1, =278=

  =Persius=, IV 26, =249=

  =Petronius=, 37, 53, =249=; 77, =251=

  =Phaedrus=, IV 5, II 8, =243=

  =Phocylides=, =25=

  =Plato= (cited by marginal pages)
    _Laws_ 630 _b_, =71=; 697 _e_, =71=; 850, =71=; 736 _c_, =72=; 936
        _c_, =72=; 744 _e_, =72=, =76=; 741, =73=; 737 foll, =76=; 754,
        =76=; 756, =76=; 919 _d_, =76=; 922 _a_-924 _a_, =76=; 705,
        =77=; 720, =77=, =79=; 742, =77=, =78=; 745 _c-e_, =77=; 760
        _e_, =77=; 763 _a_, =77=; 777 _c_, =77=; 777 _d_-778 _a_, =77=;
        793 _e_, =77=; 806 _d_, =77=; 832 _d_, =77=; 838 _d_, =77=; 842
        _c-e_, =77=; 846 _d_-847 _b_, =77=; 865 _c_, _d_, =77=; 936
        _c-e_,
  =77=; 690 _b_, =78=; 776-7, =78=; 747 _c_, =79=; 762 _e_, =79=; 823,
        =79=; 840 _e_, =79=; 886 _a_, =79=; 887 _e_, =79=; 914-5, =80=;
        932 _d_, =80=; 777 _d_, =162=;
    _Menexenus_ 237 _e_, =81=;
    _Politicus_ 293-7, =76=; 262 _d_, =78=; 289-90, =78=;
    _Republic_ 565 _a_, _b_, =71=, =72=, =76=, =102=; 421 _e_, =72=;
        416 _d_, _e_, =73=; 417, =73=; 421 _d_, =73=; 464 _c_, =73=;
        469-71, =73=; 495 _d_, =73=; 522 _b_, =73=; 540 _e_-541 _a_,
        =73=; 543 _b_, =73=; 590 _c_, =73=; 374 _c_, _d_, =74=; 433-4,
        =74=; 468 _a_, =74=; 369 _b_-373 _c_, =75=; 463 _b_, =75=;
        547 _b_ foll, =76=; 550-2, =76=; 406, =77=; 371, =78=, =375=;
        578-9, =78=; 344 _b_, =79=; 423 _b_, 435 _e_-436 _a_, =79=; 544
        _d_, =79=; 452 _c_, =79=; 467 _a_, =79=; 495 _e_, =80=;
    _Timaeus_ 24, =29=

  =Plautus=
    _Casina_ 97 foll, =124=;
    _Mercator_ 65 foll, =124=; _passim_, =124=;
    _Mostellaria_ 1-83, =124=;
    _Poenulus_ 170-1, =124=; 944-5, =124=;
    _Stichus_, title, =137=;
    _Trinummus_ 508-61, =125=;
    _Vidularia_ 21-55, =125=; 31-2, =125=

  =Pliny= (elder)
    _nat hist_ VIII 180, =229=, =282=, =286=; XIV 48-50, =160=, =265=,
        =284=; XVIII 20, =135=; XVIII 27-8, =139=, =282=; XVIII 39,
        =140=; XVIII 35, =151=, =168=, =281=, =282=, =309=; XVIII 29,
        30, =154=, =165=; XVIII 41-3, =160=; XVIII 273-4, =160=, =284=;
        XVIII 32, =166=, =282=; XVIII 1-5, =281=; XVIII 7, 18, 20,
        =281=; XVIII 19, 21, 36, =281=; XVIII 37-8, =282=; XVIII 11,
        26, =283=, =286=; XVIII 12, =283=; XVIII 15 foll, 17, =283=;
        XVIII 24, =283=; XVIII 174, =284=; XVIII 178, =284=; XVIII 36,
        =285=; XVIII 38, =286=; XVIII 120, =286=; XVIII 167, =286=;
        XVIII 170, =286=; XVIII 70, =287=; XVIII 259, =291=; XVIII 296,
        =398=; XIX 50-1, =231=, =283=; XIX 60, =282=; XXXIII 26-7,
        =285=; XXXVII 201-3, =239=, =285=

  =Pliny= (younger)
    _epistles_ I 24, =217=; I 6, =405=; II 4 § 3, =320=; III 19 § 5,
        =169=; III 19 § 7, =220=; III 19, =233=, =319=; III 19 § 2,
        =251=, =264=; III 19 § 6, =255=; III 11, =276=; III 19 § 7,
        =344=; IV 10, =318=; IV 6, =320=; V 14 § 8, =320=; V 6 § 12,
        =322=; V 6 § 46 =405=; VI 19, =274=, =319=; VI 3, =318=; VI 25,
        =322=; VII 18, =296=, =324=; VII 11, 14, =318=; VII 16, 32,
        =318=; VII 30 § 3, =320=; VIII 17, =312=; VIII 16, =318=; VIII
        15, =320=; VIII 2, =322=; VIII 17, =322=; IX 37, =233=, =319=;
        IX 28, =320=; IX 36 § 6, =320=; IX 37 § 2, =320=, =321=; IX 16,
        =321=; IX 20 § 2, =321=; IX 37, =321=; IX 37 § 3, =365=; X 8 §
        5, =320=, =321=; X 29, 30, =324=; X 86 B, =313=;
    _Panegyricus_ 42, =244=; 26-8, =273=; 36, =319=; 29, =382=

  =Plutarch=
    _apophthegmata_ =127=;
    _Aratus_ 14, 25, 27, 36, 39, 40, =112=; 24, =117=; 5-8, =128=; 9,
        12, 14, =128=;
    _Cato maior_ 27, =164=; 23, =164=; 4, =165=, =169=; 3-5, 20-1,
        =165=; 24, =167=, =243=; 5, =167=; 21, =168=, =169=; 25, =169=;
        20, =169=;
    _C Gracchus_ 7, =267=;
    _Cleomenes_ 18, =120=;
    _de defectu oraculorum_ 8, =300=;
    _de garrulitate_ 18, =117=;
    _Dion_ 27, 37, 48, =128=;
    _Flamininus_ 13, =129=;
    _Philopoemen_ 7, 15, =112=; 8, =117=; 13, =120=; 3, 4, =128=;
    _Phocion_ 28, =120=;
    _Timoleon_ 23, 36, =128=

  =Polybius=, I 31 § 4, =140=; II 62, =120=, =122=; IV 63, =118=; IV
        66, =118=; IV 75, =118=, =122=; IV 73, =120=, =122=; IV 3,
        =121=; IV 20, 21, =122=; IV 38, =122=; V 1, 3, 19, =118=; V 89,
        =118=; IX 17, =121=; X 42, =118=; XII 6, =123=; XVI 24, =118=;
        XVIII 20, =118=; XX 6, =121=; XXI 6, =118=; XXI 34, 36, 43,
        45, =118=; XXIII 1 § 11, =122=; XXV 4, =118=; XXVIII 2, =118=;
        XXXII 13 §§ 10, 11, =169=; XXXIX 8 §§ 1-5, =129=


  =Quintilian=, I 4 § 26, =137=; VI 3 § 20, =229=; X 1 §§ 46-131, =268=


  =Rutilius=, _de reditu_ I 214, =332=; I 527, 615, =412=


  =Sallust=
    _Catil_ 4 § 1, =12=, =146=, =199=; 44 §§ 5, 6, 56 § 5, =162=; 37 §
        7, =199=;
    _Iug_ 41 § 8, =144=, =248=; 73 § 6, =175=, =199=; 21, 26, 47, =274=;
    _hist fragm_ =137=

  =Salvian=, _de gubernatione Dei_ V §§ 34-50, =424=; V § 18, =425=

  =Scholia=, =238=

  =Seneca= (elder), _controvers_ II 1 §§ 5, 26, =242=; V 5, =242=; VI
        2, =242=; VII 6 § 17, =167=, =243=; VII 6 § 18, =242=; X 4 §
        18, =160=, =232=, =243=

  =Seneca= (younger)
    _ad Helviam_ 12 § 5, =139=; 7 § 7, =270=, =349=; 6 §§ 2, 3, =271=;
    _de beneficiis_ III 22 § 1, =245=; III 26, =244=; V 18 § 2, 19 § 1,
        =244=; V 19 § 9, =245=; VI 4 § 4, =246=; VII 4 § 4, =244=; VII
        5 §§ 2, 3, =247=;
    _de clementia_ I 18, =244=;
    _de constantia_ 5 § 1, =245=;
    _de ira_ III 29 § 1, =248=;
    _de vita beata_ 17 § 2, =249=;
    _Epistles_ 87 § 7, 89 § 20, =207=, =248=; 47 § 14, 86 § 14, =216=;
        86 § 15, =241=; 77 § 7, =244=; 12 § 3, =245=; 47 § 14, =245=;
        65 § 6, =245=; 88 § 21, =245=; 90 § 27, =245=; 90 § 15, =246=;
        44 § 3, =246=, =327=; 114 § 26, =246=; 123 § 2, =246=; 90 § 39,
        =248=, =315=;
    _nat quaest_ I 16 § 1, =244=

  =Sidonius Apollinaris=
    _epist_ I 6, =429=; I 10, =427=; II 2, 9, 14, =427=, =429=; II 9 §
        2, =429=; II 14, =429=; III 1, 5, =428=; III 9, =429=; IV 24,
        =427=, =429=, =430=; IV 9 § 1, =429=; IV 24 § 2, =429=; V 19,
        =423=, =430=; VI 10, 12, =428=; VII 12 § 3, =427=; VII 14 §§
        11, 16, =429=; VII 15, =429=; VIII 4, =427=, =429=; VIII 8,
        =429=; VIII 4 § 1, =429=; IX 6, =423=, =430=;
    _carm_ XXII 121-5, =429=

  =Solon=, =24-5=

  =Sophocles=
    _Antig_ 338-40, =33=;
    _OT_ 763-4, 1029, =33=;
    _Trach_ 31-3, 52-3, 61-3, =33=;
    _fragments_ =33=

  =Statius=, _silvae_ IV 3, =2=, =272=

  =Strabo=, VI 4 § 1, p 286, =232=; VIII 8 § 1, p 388, =120=; XII 3 §
        40, p 562, =2=; XIV 1 § 38, p 646, =162=; XV 1 § 40, p 704, §
        34, p 701, § 54, p 710, =210=

  =Suetonius=
    _Aug_ 32, _Tib_ 8, =160=, =232=, =324=, =326=;
    _Aug_ 41, =225=, =289=, =326=;
    _Aug_ 27, =313=;
    _Aug_ 16, 21, 24, 42, =326=;
    _Aug_ 72, =366=;
    _Claud_ 22, =287=;
    _Claud_ 25, =326=;
    _Domit_ 7, 9, 14, =272=, =327=;
    _Gaius_ 37, =366=;
    _Iul_ 42, =131=;
    _Iul_ 26, 28, =325=;
    _Nero_ 22, =287=;
    _Nero_ 31, =326=;
    _Reliquiae_ (Reifferscheid), =240=, =327=;
    _Tib_ 48, =289=;
    _Vespas_ 1, =222=, =326=;
    _Vespas_ 4, =327=

  =Sulpicius Severus=
    _dial_ II 3, =422=;
    _vita S Martini_ 2 § 5, =423=

  =Symmachus=
    _epistles_ I 5, =404=; II 6, 7, 52, 55, =403=; II 22, 52, =405=;
        II 7, =407=; III 55, 82, =403=; IV 5 [4], 18, 21, 54, 68, 74,
        =403=; IV 74, =407=; V 18, =405=; VI 15 [14], =403=; VI 82
        [81], =404=; VI 11, =405=; VI 12, =406=; VI 59, [58], 65, [64],
        =407=; VII 18, 38, 66, 68, =403=; VII 56, =404=; VII 38, 66,
        =405=; VII 126, =406=; VIII 2, =405=; IX 10, 14, 42, 114 [124],
        =403=; IX 11, =404=, =406=; IX 47 [50], =404=, =407=; IX 140,
        [X 18], =404=; IX 27 [30], 45 [48], 49 [52], =405=; IX 29, 37
        [40], =406=; IX 10, =407=; X 2, 21, =403=; X 6, =404=, =406=;
    _relationes_ 3 §§ 15-18, 9 § 7, 18, 35, 37, =403=; 9, 18, 37,
        =403=; 18, =403=; 40, 37, =408=


  =Tacitus=
    _Agricola_ 28, =292=, =310=; 19, =391=;
    _annals_ II 59, =206=; III 53-5, =163=, =283=, =288=; IV 27, =162=,
        =288=; IV 6, =288=; IV 4, =396=; VI 16, 17, =288=; XI 23,
        =274=; XII 65, =242=; XIV 27, =210=; XIV 53, =238=; XVI 13,
        =287=;
    _Germania_ 41, =270=; 29, =271=; 26, =291=; 24, =291=; 25, =292=;
    _histories_ I 11, =206=; III 8, =283=; III 24, =313=

  =Terence=
    _Adelphoe_ 45-6, 95, 401, 517-20, 541-2, 845-9, 949, =125=;
    _Hautontimorumenos_ 62-74, =125=, =167=; 93-117, =125=; 142-4,
        =125=, =167=;
    _Hecyra_ 224-6, =125=;
    _Phormio_ 362-5, =125=

  =Theocritus=, =116-21=

  =Theophrastus=, _Char_ IV (XIV), =117=

  =Thucydides=, =49-52=

  =Tibullus=, II 1 51, 6 25-6, =218=; II 1 41-2, =229=; II 1 23, =235=


  =Valerius Maximus=, IV 7, =135=; IV 4 §§ 4, 6, =139=, =243=; IV 3 §
        5, 4 § 7, 8 § 1, =243=; VII 5 § 2, =14=, =243=

  =Varro=
    _de lingua Latina_ VII § 105, =269=;
    _de re rustica_ I 2 § 17, 17 §§ 5, 7, =158=, =183=; I 17 § 2,
        =161=, =184=, =233=, =253=, =263=, =437=; I 17 §§ 3-6, =162=,
        =461=; I 2 §§ 3, 6, =178=, =406=; I 4 § 5, =178=; I 6-16,
        =180=; I 17, =180=, =239=; I 12 § 2, =180=; I 16 § 4, =180=,
        =184=, =233=; I 18, =180=; I 2 §§ 13 foll, =184=; I 22 § 1,
        =185=; I 18 §§ 2, 6, =186=; I 2 §§ 1-7, =232=; I 2 § 17, =233=;
        I 44 § 1, =265=; I 44 § 3, =291=; II _praef_ § 6, =178=; II 1
        § 16, =179=; II 3 § 7, =183=; II _praef_ § 5, =184=, =233=; II
        _praef_ §§ 3, 4, =184=; II 10 §§ 4, 5, =185=; II 2 § 20, 5 § 18,
        7 § 16, 10 § 10, =228=; II 3 § 4, =233=; II 5 § 4, =229=; III
        2 § 5, =173=, =186=; III 16 §§ 10, 11, =184=, =230=; III 3 § 4,
        17 § 6, =185=;
    _saturae_ =137=

  =Vegetius=
    _epit rei milit_ I 3, II, =417=; I 7, =397=, =417=, =418=; I 5,
        =418=; I 28, =418=;
    _mulomed_ I 56 §§ 11-13, =418=; I 56 § 35, =418=

  =Velleius=, II 8, =225=

  =Vergil=
    _Aeneid passim_ =220-1=; III 327, =229=; VI 613, =220=; VII
        641-817, =220=; VII 331-2, =230=; VIII 408-12, =221=; IX
        603-13, =220=; XII 520, =217=, =221=;
    _Bucolics_ I, II, III, IX, X, _passim_, =219=; I 40, =229=; II
        71-2, =185=; III 101, =228=; VII 4-5, =122=; X 32-3, =122=;
    _Georgics_ I 266, =185=; I 41, =221=, =230=; I 84 foll, =223=; I
        _ad fin_, =226=; I 261, =227=; I 272-3, =227=; I 316-7, =227=;
        I 494, =227=; I 291-302, =230=; I 507, =230=; I 300, =230=; I
        125-8, =232=; I 51-3, =267=, =286=; I 71-83, =291=; II 458-74,
        =222=; II _ad fin_, =226=; II 207, =227=; II 264, =227=; II
        410, =227=; II 513, =227=; II 529, =228=; II 529-31, =228=; II
        406, =230=; II 433, =230=; II 459, =230=; II 412-3, =231=; II
        136-76, =232=; II 336-42, =232=; II 532, =232=; II 198, =236=;
        III 402, =227=, =265=; III 420, =228=; III 455, =228=; III
        515-30, =228=; III 549, =228=; III 167-8, =229=; III 41, =238=;
        IV 278, =228=; IV 125-46, =230=; IV 118, 147-8, =231=; IV 116
        foll, =268=;
    _Moretum_ =231=

  =Victor=
    _Caesares_ 39 § 31, =389=; 13 §§ 5, 6, =391=;
    _de viris illustribus_ 73 §§ 1, 5, =275=

  =Vitruvius=, II 1, =218=


  =Xenophon=
    _anab_ I 2 § 27, =55=; III 2 § 26, =54=; IV 1 §§ 12-14, =10=; IV 1
        §§ 12, 13, =55=; IV 8 § 4, =55=; V 3 § 4, =55=; V 6 § 13, =55=;
        VI 1 §§ 7, 8, =53=; VI 4 § 8, =54=; VII 1 § 36, =55=; VII 2 §
        6, =55=; VII 3 § 3, =55=; VII 3 § 48, =55=; VII 7 § 53, =55=;
        VII 8 §§ 12-19, =55=;
    _Cyrop_ IV 4 §§ 5-12, =60=; VII 5 §§ 36, 73, =60=; VII 5 § 67,
        =60=; VIII 1 §§ 43-4, =60=; VIII 3 §§ 36-41, =60=;
    _economicus_ 3 §§ 1-5, =57=; 5 §§ 15, 16, =57=; 9 § 5, =57=; 12 §
        3, =57=; 12 § 19, =57=; 13 § 9, =57=; 20 §§ 22 foll, =57=; 7-9,
        12-14, 21, =57=, =58=; 1 § 4, =58=; 4 § 6, =58=; 5 § 4, =58=;
        5 § 6, =58=; 11 §§ 9, 10, =58=; 14 §§ 8, 9, =58=; 20 _passim_,
        =58=; 21 §§ 9, 10, 12, =59=;
    _hellen_ I 6 § 14, =55=; II 1 § 1, =53=; VI 2 § 37, =53=; VII 5 §
        27, =71=;
    _memor_ I 1 § 16, =56=; I 2 § 57, =56=; I 5 § 2, =56=; II 7, 8,
        =55=, =56=; II 7 §§ 7-10, =58=; II 5 § 2, =59=; II 8, =59=,
        =159=; III 7 § 6, =56=; III 9 §§ 11, 15, =56=; III 13 § 4,
        =56=; IV 2 §§ 22-31, =56=;
    _res publ Ath_ [see the ‘old oligarch’];
    _vectigalia_ =97=; 4 § 22, =59=; 4 _passim_, =60=


  =Zosimus=, I 71, =338=


IV MODERN AUTHORITIES

  Adam J, 76

  Ashburner, 462-4

  Augé-Laribé M, 385


  Barker E, 93

  Beauchet, 110

  Beloch J, 49, 52, 129, 198

  Bernays J, 97, 120

  Bernier (ed V A Smith), 204

  Blümner H, 134, 233, 253, 299

  Böckh-Fränkel, 82

  Bouchier, 463

  Bruns C G, 143, 175, 354

  Bryce, Lord, 89

  Buckland W W, 350-1, 363, 369, 376

  Bury J B, 416, 450, 456, 464


  Cairnes J E, 156

  Calderini A, 123-4

  Champagny, Comte de, 276

  Clerc M, 25

  Collitz H, 123, 126

  Conington J, 223, 227, 291

  Conway R S, 241

  Cope E M, 35, 99

  Cornford F M, 49

  Coulanges F de, 321, 347, 354, 358, 361, 365, 369, 375, 379, 383,
        392-3, 396, 420-1, 425, 431, 451, 460

  Coulton G G, 438, 466

  Croiset A, 122

  Cuq E, 345, 356


  Dareste, Haussoullier, Th Reinach, 27

  Daubeny C, 53, 223, 320

  Dill S, 395, 397, 416, 423, 427-8, 429-30

  Dirksen H E, 392, 396

  Dittenberger W, 126, 343, 374

  Ducange C D, 428


  _Encyclopaedia Biblica_, 435

  Esmein A, 342, 354, 357, 360-1, 426, 430-1


  Fowler W W, 217

  Francotte H, 48, 441

  Frazer J G, 278

  Freeman E A, 120

  Friedländer L, 306

  Gardthausen V, 237-9

  Girard P F, 272, 295, 342-3, 346, 349-51, 354, 373, 389

  Glover T R, 227

  Godefroi (Gothofredus), 391, 408

  Greenidge A H J, 152-3, 173, 175, 189, 205, 207

  Grote G, 76

  Grundy G B, 48, 51, 66, 69


  Hardy E G, 175, 177, 313, 324

  Hastings’ _Dictionary of the Bible_, 435

  Heisterbergk B, 178, 205, 342, 358-9, 388

  Hill G F, 52

  Hirschfeld O, 353-4


  Jebb R C, 33

  Johnson Clifton, 467

  Jordan H, 164-5, 169


  Kalinka E, 37, 38

  Keightley, 223, 241

  King Bolton and Okey T, 13, 457, 465

  Krumbacher, 460


  Laveleye E de, 75

  Linforth J M, 24, 25


  Macdonell A, 465

  Macgowan J, 204

  Madvig J N, 313

  Mahaffy J P, 119, 121, 301

  Maine H J S, 433, 438

  Marquardt, 293

  Mayor J E B, 251, 271, 276

  Meier-Schömann-Lipsius, 110

  Meyer Eduard, 7, 121, 206, 223, 433, 434, 435, 441, 450, 451, 454

  Mommsen Th, 126, 152, 167, 206, 237-8, 293, 296-300, 354, 374, 380,
        393, 396

  Monro C H, 344, 362, 365


  Newbigin M L, 467

  Newman W L, 65, 67, 68, 85, 98

  Nipperdey K, 289

  Nissen H, 217, 271

  Norden F, 328-35


  Pelham H F, 385

  Phillips Wendell, 449

  Prendergast, 177

  Prothero R E, 466


  Rapson E J, 210

  Rees Sir J D, 210

  Reid J S, 274

  Richmond, 218

  Ritter H and Preller L, 276

  Rodway J, 80

  Rostowzew M T, 6, 204, 212, 343, 350, 394, 396

  Rudorff A, 143


  Sandys J E, 11, 91

  Schiller H, 272-4, 383, 389, 412, 424

  Schneider J G, 263

  Schulten A, 345, 347, 351

  Schweitzer-Sidler H, 270, 291

  Seeck O (ed of Symmachus), 402

  Seeck O (History), 339, 340, 345, 348, 360, 386-98, 403, 416, 420-1,
        423, 425-6

  Seeck O (Schatzungsordnung), 388, 390, 392, 394-5, 410, 421, 431

  Seeley J R, 452

  Sellar W Y, 226, 228, 232

  Shuckburgh E S, 313, 326

  Smith V A, 210

  Spargo J, 457

  Stein H, 30

  Storr-Best Ll, 178


  The _Times_, 444, 458

  Trench Archbishop, 303-4

  Tyrrell and Purser, 207


  Vinogradoff P, 254, 356, 360, 365


  Wagner J A, 396, 412

  Wallon H, 110, 131, 173, 255, 300, 359, 395-6, 416

  Weber M, 160, 161, 179, 207, 254, 392, 426, 432

  Wescher and Foucart, 123

  Whitaker’s Almanack, 444

  Wilkins A S, 216

  Wordsworth J, 143, 175, 191

  Wyse W, 85


  Zimmern A E, 38, 441

  Zulueta, 401-2


V COUNTRIES, PLACES AND PEOPLES

  Achaia, 50, 117-8, 120-1, 129, 309

  Aegina, 52

  Aetolia, 10, 117, 122, 126

  Africa, 207, 246, 281, 283, 293, 309, 328, 333-4, 341-2, 353, 358,
        372, 377, 383, 388, 390, 391, 395, 403, 407, 413, 416, 426, 447

  Alexandria, 113-4, 118, 225, 309

  Antioch, 390, 399 foll

  Apollonia, 126

  Apulia, 162, 165, 214, 248, 406

  Aquinum, 305

  Arabia, 375

  Aragueni, 347, 374

  Arcadia, 9, 29, 50, 117, 121-3

  Argos, 26, 29, 50

  Ariminum, 405

  Armenia, 55

  Asia, 162, 180, 323

  Asia Minor, 54, 114

  Athens and Attica, 8, 9, 11, 25, 29, 30, 31-2, 34, 36, 37-9, 40-7,
        49-51, 63-4, 70-1, 76, 81-4, 86, 88, 96, 105-11, 114, 116-7,
        120, 282, 302


  Bagaudae, 383, 424

  Baiae, 309

  Bastarnae, 338-9

  Bithynia, 324

  Boeotia and Thebes, 9, 22, [71], 101, 103-4, 121

  Britain, 292, 325, 412, 426, 429

  Brundisium, 162

  Bruttium, 192

  Byzantium, 55, 122, [388]


  Campania, 177, 198, 390, 404, 406

  Capua, 198, 408

  Carthage, 118, 126, 132, 151, 164, 204, 353, 358

  Cephallenia, 118

  China, 204, 209

  Chios, 51, 53

  Cisalpine, Po country, 14, 152, 163, 220, 228, 240, 286, [296]

  Constantinople, 388, 403, 408, 416, 460-1

  Corcyra, 51, 53, 126, 178

  Corinth, 28, 31, 53, 66, 70, 86, 118

  Cremona, 141, 152

  Crete, 9, 26-7, 101


  Dacia, 338

  Delphi, 123

  Demetrias, 113


  Egypt, 20, 28-9, 72, 180, 204, 206-8, 210, 283, 309, 358, 375, 388,
        391, 395, 403, 407, 416, 460-2

  Elis, 50, 118, 120

  Epidamnus, 126

  Epirus, 181, 207, 309, 416

  Etruria, 14, 27-8, 134, 156, 162, 165, 190-1, 220, 337, 435

  Euboea, 52, 300 foll

  Euxine, 53-5


  Formiae, 311

  Franks, 338, 412, 424, 426


  Gaul, 325, 383, 390, 398-9, 410 foll, 416, 423 foll, 426-31

  Gepidae, 338

  Germany and Germans, 270-1, 273, 288, 291-2, 387, 410, 412, 414, 416

  Goths, 337, 413-4, 416, 424, 426-7, 428

  Greece, Roman, 300 foll, 329-33

  Gruthungi, 338, 416


  Heraclea Pontica, 29, 436

  Huns, 416, 424, 427


  Illyria, 126

  Illyricum, 180, 416

  India, 27, 204, 209-10

  Ionia, 25

  Isauria, 337

  Italy and the Provinces, 163, 203-5, 232, [250], 271, 283, 288,
        308-9, 323, 365, 380-2, 407

  Italy becomes Provincial, 272, [288], 365, 388, 403, 406

  Italy, survival of peasantry in upland parts, 14, 163, 182, [184],
        [216], 220, 222, 239, 284-5, 297, [327]


  Lamasba, 274, 293

  Larisa, 126-7

  Lemnos, Imbros, Scyros, 84

  Lesbos, 52

  Ligures Baebiani, 296

  Lucania, 14, 165, 220

  Lugudunum, 426-7, 429

  Lysimacheia, 113


  Macedon, 10, 29, 80-1, 101, 103-5, 117-8, 121-2, 126, 132, 207

  Macedonia, 403

  Madaura, 328

  Mantua, 236

  Massalia, 183

  Mauretania, 405, 412

  Mediolanum, 388

  Megalopolis, 117, 120, 122, 129

  Megara, 50-1, 66, 82

  Messenia, 121

  Miletus, 66

  Moesia, 338


  Narbo, 429

  Novum Comum, 281, 322, 324


  Oea, 328

  Ostia, 309, 405


  Patrae, 309

  Peiraeus, 38, 46, 79, 88, 90, 96, 100

  Persia, 27-8, 54, [60-1], 66, 71, 80, 83, 103, 132, 338

  Phoenicians, 20, 435

  Picenum, 282

  Placentia, 141, 152, 296

  Praeneste, 404

  Puteoli, 309, 406, 408


  Rhineland, 412-3

  Rhodes, 114, 118, 122

  Roman expansion in Italy, 133-4, 152

  Roman history, course of, 10, 11, 200, 203 foll, 211-2, 232, 237-8,
        244, 270 foll, 287 foll, 308-9, 313, 323, 336 foll, 379 foll,
        386 foll, 415, 426-7, 448-51, 460-4

  Rome as political centre, 13, 133, 153, 168, 250, [402-3]


  Sabine country, 215-7, 232, 234, 327

  Samnium, 135, [296], 405

  Samos, 105

  Samothrace, 82

  Sardinia, 126, 403

  Saxons, 412

  Scaptoparene, 346, 374

  Scythia, 30, 32

  Sicily, 113-4, 126, 162, 175, [181], 195-8, 204, 207, 246, 405, 447

  Sicyon, 128

  Slavs, 464

  Southern Italy, 190, 388

  Spain, 241, 244, 250, 270, 285, 305, 323, 328, 403, 426

  Sparta and Laconia, 9, 26, 29, 30, 38, 68-70, 71-2, 75, 82, 86, 95,
        100, 103-4, 118, 120, 436

  Syracuse, 26-7, 67, 71, 88, 114, 118, 128, 132, 204, 436


  Tarracina, 406, 408

  Thessaly, 9, 26-7, 83, 86, 101, 116, 126-7, 436

  Thrace, 51, 55, 105, 414

  Thracian Chersonese, 84, 105

  Tibur, 294, 404

  Tusculum, 294


  Umbria, 327


  Vandals, 338, 424

  Varia, 215-7

  Veleia, 296

  Volaterrae, 191


     CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY J. B. PEACE, I.A., AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AGRICOLA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.