THE 20-MULE-TEAM BRIGADE
Being a story in Jingles of the good works and adventures of the famous
                           “Twenty-Mule-Team”


                     Illustrations by PETER NEWELL


                              PUBLISHED BY
                      THE PACIFIC COAST BORAX CO.
                   NEW YORK · CHICAGO · SAN FRANCISCO


            COPYRIGHT 1904, BY OTIS H. KEAN, INC., NEW YORK

[Illustration: “Each Warrior bears a trusty gun—”]




                      THE TWENTY-MULE-TEAM BRIGADE


                 Here is a band of twenty mules,
                 Enlisted for the fight
                 Against the King of Dirt who rules
                 His armies, black as night.

                 Each warrior bears a trusty gun—
                 The best that he can find—
                 And this is charged with pure Borax—
                 The 20-Mule-Team kind.

                 “My noble men,” their Captain said,
                 “Before we sally out,
                 We’ll rid this home of old King Dirt,
                 And put his host to rout.

                 Then let us to the kitchen go,
                 And there begin the fight;
                 The kitchen where the food is cooked
                 Should cleanly be and bright.”

[Illustration: “‘Halt!’ sharply cried the Captain. ‘Fire!’”]




                      THE BATTLE OF DISH PAN HILL


              And so this Borax army marched
              In through the kitchen door,
              And there beheld a tarnished fort
              Of tinware on the floor.

              Behind the pans and kettles stood,
              In sullen black array,
              A grimy band of vicious Imps
              All ready for the fray.

              “Halt!” sharply cried the Captain. “Fire!”
              And all along the line,
              The volleys rang and rang again—
              My! but the sight was fine!

              The Borax powder swept the fort,
              And rattled pot and pan;
              The grimy Imps were rattled, too,
              And dropped their arms and ran,

              Till every skulking Imp was gone,
              And every thing was clean.
              The tinware shone like burnished gold—
              Like burnished tin, I mean.

              And so was ended, happily,
              The fight of Dish Pan Hill;
              The mules all cheered and waved their ears,
              And with a hearty will.

[Illustration: “But Borax poultice well applied at once relieved his
pain—”]




                     ACCIDENT ON THE WAY TO NURSERY


               “My noble men,” the Captain said,
               “We’ll take a change of air,
               And look into the nursery,
               And rout the Imps in there.

               The children’s health must be preserved—
               No duty is more plain—
               So we will purify their room,
               And thus their favor gain.”

               So up two flights of stairs they marched,
               But ere they reached the top,
               A clumsy private tripped and fell—
               He thought he’d never stop!

               It was a quite extended trip,
               And rough at every point;
               It landed him down in the hall,
               And sore in every joint.

               But Borax poultice well applied
               At once relieved his pain—
               So up he jumped and climbed the stair,
               And joined his friends again.

               Then in the nursery they went—
               This noble Borax band—
               And sure enough there was a host
               Of grimy Imps on hand.

[Illustration: “My! How this pony’s anger burned! Although it didn’t
smoke!”]




                       THE BATTLE OF ROCKY POINT


                 And all the Imps were casting dirt,
                 And striving to o’erthrow
                 A very pretty Hobby Horse,
                 With coat as white as snow.

                 My! How this pony’s anger burned!
                 Although it didn’t smoke!
                 And back and forth he madly rocked
                 At these pernicious folk.

                 But little cared they for his rocks—
                 They dodged them, everyone.
                 But when the mules began to fire,
                 Ah! then there was some fun!

                 And thus the room was brightened up,
                 And rendered clean and sweet
                 In every part, with thoroughness—
                 Ah, Borax’s hard to beat!

                 And then again the warriors cheered—
                 The Hobby Horse joined in,
                 With all the other happy toys,
                 And made a joyful din.

                 They called the battle “Rocky Point,”
                 Because their friend, new made,
                 The Hobby Horse, was on the rock,
                 When they came to his aid.

[Illustration: “Mount Washington began to melt, and soon was on the
line!”]




                     THE MELTING OF MT. WASHINGTON


               “And now my men”, the Captain said,
               “We’ve done here what we could;
               Suppose the laundry we invade,
               And try to do some good.”

               The wash was piled upon the floor,
               And quite a mount it made—
               Mount Wash-ington, a mule declared,
               And all his comrades brayed!

               But straight to work these warriors went,
               And soon the clothes were tubbed,
               And Borax sifted in the suds,
               And every piece was scrubbed.

               My! how the dirt did disappear—
               Thanks to the Borax, fine!
               Mount Washington began to melt,
               And soon was on the line!

               “Oh! won’t the girl be glad, my men!”
               The Captain said with glee,
               “When she comes down to do her wash,
               And finds it done! He! He!”

               Now Jane, the girl, had common sense,
               And so she kept on hand,
               From that time forth, a Borax stock—
               The 20-Mule-Team-Brand.

[Illustration: “And three or four with hearty cheer, jumped in like
jolly frogs.”]




                        THE BRIGADE TAKES A BATH


               From room to room these warriors marched,
               And waged a warfare keen,
               Against the power of old King Dirt,
               Till all the house was clean.

               Then having finished well their work,
               Again they climbed the stair,
               In broken ranks with mulish pranks,
               A welcome bath to share.

               They filled the tub with water clear,
               And slipped outside their togs,
               And three or four with hearty cheer,
               Jumped in like jolly frogs.

               Jumped in, I say, but that was all;
               For, friends, what do you think!
               The water was so very hard,
               They found they could not sink!

               A situation queer as this
               Is wrong, you must admit;
               And so they sprinkled Borax in
               The water—just a bit.

               This made it soft, and in they sank
               And kicked and splashed it high,
               Till ordered out that others might
               Their places occupy.

[Illustration: “Ere long their Captain shouted: ‘March!’”]




                       AN APRIL FOOL ON THE MARCH


                Out in the yard these veterans
                Now stood with colors spread.
                How oft their mettle had been tried,
                When bravely they were lead!

                Ere long their Captain shouted: “March!”
                Then spake a private, cool:
                “It isn’t March; it’s April, sir—
                Someone’s an April Fool!”

                Which was a very saucy thing,
                Indeed, for him to say.
                And so his mouth was well rinsed out
                With Borax, right away.




                             A NIGHT ATTACK


             That night they camped within a wood
             And built a fire with oak,
             Against a hollow tree that served
             To carry off the smoke.

             But so it chanced that in the tree
             A swarm of bees were caged,
             And when the smoke disturbed their rest,
             They sallied forth, enraged.

             And how they chased those twenty mules,
             And punctured well their hide!
             But, lo! their smarts were straightway eased,
             When Borax was applied.

[Illustration: “And how they chased those twenty mules, and punctured
well their hide!”]




                           A SILENT SENTINEL


                   Whene’er a 20-Mule-Team Brave
                   Was wearied with the fray,
                   He rested in a Borax ring
                   To keep the bugs away.

                   But if perchance a single bug
                   Had crossed the line to harm him,
                   He would have known it instantly;
                   The ring would have alarmed him!

[Illustration: “He rested in a Borax ring to keep the bugs away.”]




                       A RATHER STICKY EXPERIENCE


                One day, within a grove of spruce,
                They gathered gum to chew,
                But, oh! it was so sticky that
                It acted quite like glue!

                They could not separate their teeth,
                However hard they tried,
                Till with a tooth-brush, smartly used,
                Some Borax they applied.

                So on a board they wrote a sign,
                And tacked it to a tree,
                Right in the middle of the grove
                Where everyone could see.

                It said: “There’s nothing quite so good
                With which to brush the teeth,
                As 20-Mule-Team-Borax. Yours,”
                And signed their names beneath.

[Illustration: “One day, within a grove of spruce, they gathered gum to
chew.”]




                         A CASE OF CHICKEN-POX


                  A mule broke out with chicken-pox—
                  Broke out his tent, you see,
                  And so exposed the other mules
                  That chanced around to be.

                  And did he spread the dire disease?
                  Not he, the precious scamp!
                  They scattered Borax everywhere
                  To disinfect the camp.

[Illustration: “A mule broke out with chicken-pox—broke out his tent,
you see.”]




                            A FUNNY INCIDENT


                And so these mules from place to place,
                Did wander in and out,
                Adventures meeting everywhere,
                With laughter and with shout;

                Suppressing filth and doing good
                To all they chanced to meet,
                Except of course the grimy Imps,
                Who always met defeat.

                One day these warriors chanced upon
                A dirty, ill-kept mule,
                Out in a pasture all alone,
                Which plot he seemed to rule.

                “We’ll clean him up!” the Captain said.
                “He needs a good shampoo;
                And so we’ll show him for his good,
                What Borax wash will do!”

                They drenched him to the skin, and then
                They rubbed him all around,
                Until the lather rose like wool,
                And trickled to the ground.

                The mules declared he looked just like
                A great big wooly sheep.
                They laughed so hard they almost died,
                And salty tears did weep!

                And then they ducked him in a pond,
                And rinsed the lather out;
                And out he came a cleanly mule,
                And better mule, no doubt.

                And so this story we will end,
                With three good hearty cheers
                For Borax and the twenty mules,
                And forty waving ears!

[Illustration: “The mules declared he looked just like a great big wooly
sheep.”]


                                THE END.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           A WORD ABOUT BORAX




                      BORAX A HOUSEHOLD NECESSITY


Everyone who values cleanliness and sweetness should use Borax. In the
toilet, bath, laundry, in every cleansing process of the home Borax
should be used. It doubles the power of soap and water to cleanse and
purify. You will be astonished to see how much easier and cleaner you
can wash things by adding a little Borax to the water. But be careful to
get Pure Borax as imitations are worthless and often injurious. Ask for
“20-MULE-TEAM BRAND.” _It’s Pure._

                      THE PACIFIC COAST BORAX CO.
              Largest Refiners of Pure Borax in the World
                   NEW YORK · CHICAGO · SAN FRANCISCO

[Illustration: [20-Mule-Team Boxes]]

[Illustration: In the heart of the desert—the “20-Mule-Team” hauling
Borax]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE 20-MULE-TEAM BRIGADE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.